See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/320586190 
Institutional Culture in Higher Education 
Chapter · January 2018 
DOI: 10.1007/978-94-017-9553-1_544-1 
CITATIONS 
READS 2 
2,301 
2 authors: 
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects: 
William G. Tierney University of Southern California 
238 PUBLICATIONS 4,620 CITATIONS 
SEE PROFILE 
Michael Lanford University of Southern California 
29 PUBLICATIONS 69 CITATIONS 
SEE PROFILE 
Social Justice View project 
All content following this page was uploaded by Michael Lanford on 09 January 2018. 
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. 
IInstitutional Culture in Higher Education 
William G. Tierney and Michael Lanford University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA 
Synonyms 
Institutional viewpoints; Organizational culture 
Introduction 
In recent years, colleges and universities throughout the world have engaged in an impressive number of institutional initiatives and activities that complicate the notion of a single, unified culture in higher education. To promote research and cultivate ties with business communities, universities have courted private donors, forged alliances with dissimilar institutions, and cemented entrepreneurial partnerships with a variety of corporate entities (Eckel and Hartley 2008). To nurture global networks and recruit talented students, many prominent universities have explored the viability of building branch campuses in foreign countries (Lanford and Tierney 2016). Online education has transformed what many institutions think of as their traditional constituency or who teach their courses. Meanwhile, national governments focused on improving the skillsets of 
workers to meet the challenges of a knowledge economy have encouraged tertiary institutions to create new degree programs and expand access to students from previously underrepresented ethnic and socioeconomic backgrounds (Jongbloed et al. 2008). Hence, the identity of a university campus is not often easily definable, especially since the culture of an institution is both subjective – depending on the perspectives and motivations of different individuals – and complex – moving beyond the descriptive clarity offered by organizational charts and quantitative measurements of institutional progress. 
As faculty and staff endeavor to ascribe meaning to their work and students attempt to decide which college or university is the best fit for their career goals, the topic of institutional culture has taken on special relevance in higher education studies. This entry explores institutional culture by first defining culture writ large and explaining its utility in deciphering the complex nature of higher education institutions. Afterward, six important terms that establish a framework for examining institutional culture are provided and discussed in detail. Subsequently, the import of an institutional culture framework for administrators and researchers is delineated. The paper concludes with a summary of the advantages and disadvantages of a cultural perspective, along with a brief prospectus for future research on institutional culture in higher education. 
 Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2018 J.C. Shin, P. Teixeira (eds.), Encyclopedia of International Higher Education Systems and Institutions, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-017-9553-1_544-1 
Defining Institutional Culture 
Until the 1980s, the study of culture was thought to reside in the discipline of anthropology, where researchers studied “exotic” tribes. Modern organizational studies, conversely, presumed that rational decision-making and strategic planning could be fostered by a clarification of lines of authority (Chaffee and Tierney 1988). Through such a hierarchical structure, a select group of leaders would chart a path for the institution, setting necessary rules and guidelines, while lower-level staff and faculty assiduously followed. The environment of an institution consisted of a fixed number of identifiable elements. To the extent that an organization might undergo substantive change, it was perceived as a necessary response to consumer preferences. 
Over the past couple of decades, however, the field of cultural studies has become a mature, active area of academic research. Concurrently, linear and formalized decision-making arrangements have been displaced by flatter, more collaborative structures. Insomuch as they encourage diversity, intrinsic motivation, and autonomy, such environments are often better incubators for the cultivation of innovative ideas (Tierney and Lanford 2016). Hence, a deeper understanding of culture has become vital for those who wish to encourage an innovative climate that can enable higher education to positively impact diverse societies and nations. 
The topic of culture is most conspicuous when people transcend their home culture and recognize that their assumptions, beliefs, and practices are at odds with the norms of a new cultural environment. Likewise, institutional culture in higher education is perhaps most apparent when individuals move to a new campus environment after spending a significant amount of time at a single college or university. In such instances, the relationships between faculty and administrators, the expectations concerning office hours, the procedures concerning student grading and plagiarism, and the implicit, yet axiomatic, practices guiding dozens of daily interactions may be quite different, if not alienating. It is important to emphasize that these practices are only seldom codified, they 
are rarely static. Therefore, it takes considerable time for an individual to comprehend the intricate web of relationships and routines that constitute institutional culture. Moreover, one’s understanding of institutional culture is subject to reinterpretation as new individuals instigate change through the unique perspectives and ideas they introduce and propagate (Austin and McDaniels 2006). 
For these reasons, most contemporary discussions of institutional culture proceed from the epistemological stipulation that the organizational environment of higher education is “socially constructed.” This view is different from some, like Peterson and Spencer (1990), who define culture as “the deeply embedded patterns of organizational behavior and the shared values, assumptions, beliefs, or ideologies that members have about their organization or its work” (p. 142). While it is true that every institution depends on a certain level of fidelity to shared values, assumptions, beliefs, and ideologies, a socially constructed view of institutional culture does not rely entirely on agreement among individuals. It acknowledges the pluralistic, occasionally cacophonous, landscape of the contemporary university, where experts are brought together from a wide range of backgrounds and disciplines. These individuals are likely to perceive vigorous debate as a necessary activity for deeper understanding, rather than as a barrier to progress. 
According a perspective grounded in social construction, individuals within an institution also rely on a wealth of organizational data – including information gleaned from their orientation events, peer advice, and their knowledge of campus traditions – to comprehend their institutional activities, construct their own identities within their institutions, and supply meaning to contemporary events. Early studies by Weick, as well as Nystrom and Starbuck, explored the implications of conducting organizational research from a socially constructed perspective. Weick (1979) argued that “boundaries between organizations and environment are never quite as clearcut or stable as many organizational theorists think... these boundaries shift, disappear, and are arbitrarily drawn” (p. 133). Nystrom and Starbuck (1984) contended that understanding this delicate interplay between organizations and the environment was vital in a dynamic world where organizations must respond in real-time to broader crises. 
In reading these authors (as well as subsequent writers on institutional culture), the influence of anthropologist Clifford Geertz (1973) is omnipresent. According to Geertz, the definition of culture concerns the following: 
Man is an animal suspended in webs of significance he himself has spun. I take culture to be those webs, and the analysis of it to be therefore not an experimental science in search of law, but an interpretive one in search of meaning. (p. 5) 
Two implications follow from Geertz’s definition of culture. First, a comprehensive understanding of any higher education institution requires analysis beyond the structural elements and established procedures (i.e., the web) of the institution. An understanding of how individuals interpret their place within that web is equally vital. Second, one cannot expect that an objective history of any given institution, combined with established organizational norms, will result in a limited set of immutable outcomes for any given situation. Instead, a broad array of factors – including changes in the greater environment, the unanticipated actions of individual actors, and the constructed understanding of an institution’s history – are more likely to inform contemporary events. 
The task of coming to terms with each of the disparate elements in Geertz’s web to construct an embryonic picture of institutional culture is admittedly daunting. However, one might argue that it is essential in today’s competitive higher education environment. Many crises in higher education can be attributed to instances in which an actor or group of actors, such as an administrator or a board of trustees, transgress the boundaries of institutional culture, resulting in strained relationships, general confusion about shared values and goals, and conflict. Unfortunately, introspective ruminations concerning the cultural values of an institution often become a priority only during such moments of crisis, once individuals find it necessary to assert their significance within the organizational web. 
In summary, one could reasonably contend that administrators and researchers need to have more than an intuitive understanding of institutional culture. By consciously interrogating and understanding the codes, symbols, and interpretations that inform institutional culture, leaders can appraise likely outcomes before charting a course of action. The next section outlines a conceptual language that can be utilized to depict and examine institutions across various national higher education systems, thus delineating a useful framework for the consideration of institutional culture. 
Key Terms: Assembling a Conceptual Framework 
When anthropologists conduct fieldwork to better understand the culture of a society or a collective group, they are equipped with disciplinaryspecific terms, such as “fictive kinship,” that define commonly encountered phenomena. These terms are not only intelligible to other anthropologists, but also deemed crucial for a thorough description and analysis of a given culture or cultural activity. For a discussion of institutional culture in higher education, it is therefore useful to pinpoint similarly important phenomena and provide a working terminology that can serve as the basis for a conceptual framework (Välimaa 1998). In what follows, six such terms are provided – mission, environment, socialization, information, strategy, and leadership: 
1. Mission: As described by Fugazzotto (2009), “mission statements dictate the core activities of an organization” (p. 285). For colleges and universities, mission statements are exceptionally important, as they can affirm which parts of the institution should be points of emphasis, how resources are allocated, and the types of individuals that are considered exemplary members of the university community. The language used to depict elements of a mission statement can also provide clues about an institution’s relationship with the surrounding community, its status among peer institutions, its aspirations, and its priorities. If a mission statement is articulated regularly by prominent administrators and other university officials, the culture and direction of the institution may be understood by stakeholders. If it is not articulated frequently or is unclear, the mission statement may be ineffectual, and institutional priorities may be contested by various actors. 2. Environment: The environment surrounding a higher education institution can be interpreted in multiple ways, particularly in today’s digital age. Traditionally, though, one might first consider the relationship between the university campus and its surrounding city or town. The extent to which the student population of the institution reflects the demographics of the city’s citizenry can provide valuable information about its impact on, and relationship with, the community. 
The state of an institution’s campus can also shed light on an institution’s heritage. Some universities have strategically positioned statues and inscriptions, harkening back to august figures that either cast the institution in a positive light as prominent alumni or gave back to their institution through financial donations or extended periods of service. A university that considers itself to be innovative and transgressive, on the other hand, may deliberately eschew Gothic architecture in favor of modern buildings that proudly exhibit new investments in technology or resemble the type of work environment future graduates will hopefully one day inhabit. If an institution values residential education, the campus will be populated by student learning spaces and dorms. If an institution’s student population mostly commutes to campus, study locations may be limited to a couple of buildings. Finally, the attitudes of faculty and staff toward their institutional environment may reveal whether an individual is comfortable with their institutional culture or if they pine for the type of institution they attended as undergraduate or graduate students. 
The digital age has thrown the idea of “environment” into turmoil. What does it suggest for 
an institution when it is located in Maine, for example, but its students reside in all 50 states? The environment surely is no longer defined by a geographic radius; at the same time, the institution still needs to incorporate its members into the culture of the institution. Today, the institutional environment is shaped as much by the flows of international and intranational students and faculty as the campus location. 3. Socialization: The process of socialization is how actors – whether they are students, staff, or faculty – discern which values and character traits are valued by their institution (Tierney and Rhoads 1994). This aspect of institutional culture can be assessed in at least three different ways. First, one can examine how new members in an institution become socialized to their environment. Second, similar to the analysis of mission statements, the manner and frequency in which socialization is articulated can be investigated. Third, one can assume the position of different individuals within the institution and interrogate the types of knowledge that are necessary for success in their positions. Through each of these three approaches, knowledge about the socialization process can offer insights into why people interpret and react to institutional actions in a certain fashion. Socialization becomes particularly important in the twenty-first century insofar as some students and faculty may study and work from afar. And more individuals work from home than ever before. Nevertheless, individuals still need to be socialized to the culture of the organization. The degree to which an institution’s leaders consider these issues, the likelier they are to create and maintain a vibrant culture, even from a distance. 4. Information: Although information may appear to be a straight-forward concept, it can be subject to an equally complex set of considerations as the other terms listed here. Similar to socialization, three different approaches can guide an understanding of information in institutional culture. A valuable starting point is to query what constitutes information within an institution. In today’s age of email, twitter feeds, and numerous social media outlets, individuals are often inundated with “urgent” messages and, at times, suspect information. As a result, the process by which individuals determine who holds useful information is also a vital line of inquiry. After determining what information is significant and who holds it, the efficacy of how information is disseminated can be assessed. Public representatives of the university regularly supply information about their institutions through speeches and formal documents. Increasingly, however, as higher education institutions adopt neoliberal ideologies and the practices of corporate culture (Kirp 2003; Slaughter and Leslie 1997), marketing and communications departments have become essential generators and communicators of information that can inform an analysis of institutional culture (Olssen and Peters 2005). 
As a result, these departments also play a crucial role in defining and promulgating organizational identities. Traditionally, higher education has been portrayed as a field of “loosely coupled institutions” that are not only inward looking, but resistant to change (Weick 1976; Stensaker 2015). With state governments demanding increased accountability and efficiency from higher education, many colleges and universities have been compelled to take charge of their public image, instigate reforms, and publicize identified strengths while competing for scarce resources. One active area of research on institutional culture investigates such “branding” efforts, insofar as they represent a deliberate attempt to shape public opinion and frequently engender resistance from within the institution (Humphreys and Brown 2002; Stensaker 2007; Wæraas and Solbakk 2009). 5. Strategy: Strategic concerns may involve some of the most complicated and subjective aspects of an institutional culture analysis. At many universities where academic freedom and shared governance are presumed to be nonnegotiable, fundamental values of the institution, faculty may expect a participative decision-making process, especially for institutional decisions that match their expertise, 
such as curricular issues (Rhoades 2005). If leaders do not respect these values and expectations, their internal legitimacy may be undermined and institutional trust and support for future strategies may be difficult to obtain (Stensaker and Vabø 2013). And yet, shared governance and academic freedom are not universal values in higher education systems throughout the world, nor are they uniformly embraced at colleges and universities within the same country (Altbach 2001). Hence, many institutions may adopt a more linear strategic process, with even minor strategic decisions remaining the province of a small group of individuals in high-level administrative positions. 
The rhetoric of change and disruption also plays a role in contemporary strategic decision-making, particularly when it appears that early adopters of a new technology may have a strategic advantage over peer institutions. Lest they be placed at a disadvantage that could cripple their institutions’ future economic viability, many leaders feel compelled to make quick decisions, circumventing traditional participatory processes that give voice to multiple constituencies. Consequently, communication becomes an essential tool for the dissemination and implementation of institutional strategies. In the next section, the importance of communication will be discussed in greater detail. 6. Leadership: Leadership may seem to be the most obvious aspect of institutional culture, but it is a deceptively complicated concept, especially in the university setting. Everyone might point to a university president or provost as individual “leaders.” Nevertheless, the leaders who, at times, have the most palpable impact on institutional practices may be deans or division chairs who enjoy enhanced legitimacy due to their academic backgrounds as professors within the departments they oversee. The expectations for different levels of leadership can vary drastically, depending on the institution. Furthermore, “informal” leaders who do not hold a specific leadership position, yet are recognized as dependable individuals who represent certain important positions on behalf of others, exist in every institution. A thorough examination of institutional culture explores the expectations that individuals have of leadership, the multilayered nature of leadership, and the recognized “formal” and “informal” leaders in an effort to contextualize strategic decisions that impact higher education institutions. 
Taken together, the six terms that have been described here in detail – mission, environment, socialization, information, strategy, and leadership – form a comprehensible, and potentially useful, framework for understanding institutional culture. As one might anticipate, how one enacts a term changes over time. As we noted above, for example, the environment of the twenty-first century gets defined in a manner very different from that of the 1980s. How students are socialized to the mores of the organization involves social media in a manner that did not exist a generation ago. Nevertheless, the terms themselves remain of fundamental import. The applicability of this framework, however, is dependent on a view of higher education institutions as socially constructed. In the next section, the ways in which an institutional culture framework can be useful for different stakeholders, namely administrators and researchers, are explored. 
Import of Institutional Culture for Administrators and Researchers 
Higher education institutions, despite their longevity and reverence for tradition, are not static entities. Administrators who consider their institutions from a cultural perspective keep the multidimensional nature of higher education in mind. Depending on the individual, this can be either a disconcerting or a liberating way of looking at an institution. On the one hand, a cultural perspective suggests that, for most problems, no single solution is likely to ameliorate every potential issue and appease all parties. On the other hand, a cultural perspective encourages administrative creativity and multiple feedback channels. By weighing the positives and negatives advised by 
a framework similar to the one outlined above, administrators may feel less beholden to tradition and more willing to solicit diverse opinions and build consensus in support of a bold initiative. They might also be mindful that a viable solution for an issue will likely need to be revisited at some point in the future, as both the environment and the individuals within an institution continue to evolve. 
Amid this turbulent environment, two key administrative behaviors have the potential to instill a sense of stability and confidence within an institution. First, adherence to an institutional identity is key. Change is a healthy part of any organization. And yet, change that appears to contradict the core values of an institution, as established by cultural artifacts such as the institutional mission statement, can foment a sense of existential despair, even among the most talented and/or productive individuals. The challenge for many institutions today involves maintaining a strong sense of identity while remaining dynamic enough to respond to outside pressures and environmental needs (Vaira 2004). Leadership that changes institutional direction or priorities based on the vagaries of the marketplace may well solve a short-term problem, but they may also do nothing for long-term viability. 
Second, the maintenance of effective communication channels is critical in any conceptualization of institutional culture. For mission statements to be effective, their basic principles need to be reinforced by leadership through speeches, letters, and other forms of written and spoken discourse, especially at times of institutional uncertainty. When new people join an institution, the socialization process needs to establish preferred forms of communication so that feedback channels can be utilized. Additionally, communication from administrators is essential during strategic reform processes that can easily be misinterpreted by individual actors. 
It is important to emphasize that researchers looking to establish either an association or causality between two isolated variables are not likely to be seduced by a framework based on institutional culture (Smircich and Stubbart 1985). Researchers gathering qualitative data, however, will almost invariably notice that few events are perceived by individuals in a similar light. Similar to administrators who are mindful of the multidimensionality of their institutions, researchers who are attracted to Geertz’s definition of culture will find an institutional culture framework an invaluable tool for contextualizing and making sense of their participants’ intricate “webs of significance.” In short, a cultural perspective enables the exploration of the multiple perceptions at work within a single institution. 
A cultural perspective also embraces the temporal nature of an institution by encouraging longitudinal analysis, along with the collection of historically derived data. This gives researchers an opportunity to triangulate sources so that complex phenomena, such as the effects of institutional change over time, can be comprehensively examined. Such an investigation requires the sort of “thick description” advocated by Geertz. Institutional portraits, like those pioneered by Burton Clark (1970, 1971), are excellent ways to demonstrate the enactment of culture in higher education. By capturing the voices and attitudes of several individuals from throughout the institutional spectrum, a more authentic portrayal can be produced than that of a faceless crowd stifling top-down reforms or a heroic individual fomenting comprehensive change. 
Advantages and Disadvantages of an Institutional Culture Perspective 
To summarize many of the earlier points of this article, an institutional culture perspective confers several advantages. It acknowledges that decisions are complex, necessitating the consultation of numerous stakeholders and the consideration of multiple perspectives. A nuanced understanding of institutional culture has the potential to help leaders anticipate problems, minimizing the potential for cultural conflict. 
As Kezar and Eckel (2002) have demonstrated in their research on institutional transformations, a thorough consideration of institutional culture is particularly important during periods in which leaders are planning change strategies. Without a thorough understanding of the history of an institution, administrators and other change agents may repeat failed strategies that cause consternation throughout an institution. At some institutions, specific individuals in impacted positions may feel as though their input is necessary before the implementation stage of an institutional change can commence. Moreover, change may not be accepted among individuals within the institutional community if certain informal leaders are not recognized and given an opportunity to express their opinions and/or support. 
Lastly, an institutional culture perspective does not presume that procedures which are successful at one institution can simply be transferred to another, without modification. As Robert Arnove (2003) has observed, “the school system of each country reflects the corresponding sociocultural systems within which they are embedded. One cannot simply uproot elements of one society and expect them to flourish in the soil of another society” (p. 7). By employing an institutional culture framework, researchers can specify tangible reasons why what works at one university may not work at another university, even if the two institutions share many similarities. 
One of the primary disadvantages of an institutional culture framework relates to its willingness to embrace complexity. To meet externally imposed goals, it may make rational sense for administrators to fixate on specific metrics and rely on proven techniques that have produced desired results in the past. At the same time, an institution focused on the procurement of funds might use an institutional culture framework to better understand the relationship of the university with its alumni base, the institutional messages that are most attractive to potential donors, or the possible negative effects of a tuition increase. 
Another potential negative effect concerns the resource-intensive nature of understanding the institutional culture. A thorough process of consensus building, among several different constituencies, may delay the implementation of administrative directives. Industry partners interested in developing a mutually beneficial, vocational curriculum may find the shared governance model too sluggish. Also, some individuals in powerful positions may be troubled by the notion of researchers giving traditionally disenfranchised groups a platform where their experiences and concerns in an institution can be heard by an outside audience. 
Conclusion 
As we noted at the outset, higher education is undergoing a period of unprecedented turbulence, with institutions engaging in a multitude of partnerships, initiatives, and new programs to maintain relevance in the twenty-first century. Some even argue that the status quo is no longer tenable. Of consequence, individuals have tried to figure out what might enable higher education institutions to move forward, rather than remain wedded to the norm. 
The point is not to drop everything that outsiders might consider superfluous or to copy another institution’s successful strategies. Rather, the challenge is to communicate to insiders and outsiders what an institution values and how those values distinguish one institution from other colleges and universities. An institutional culture framework enables the kind of reflexivity necessary for administrators to clarify an institution’s identity while highlighting its singular qualities. In addition, researchers employing a cultural framework can develop a profound understanding of what enables change within an institution. In doing so, they can capture the intricate tapestry of individuals and aspirations that enrich many impactful colleges and universities throughout the world. 
Cross-References 
Academic Identity in Higher Education Academic Profession Types of Higher Education Systems 
﻿Research Culture in Higher Education: The Case of a Foreign Language Department in Mexico 
Cultura de la investigación: el caso de un Departamento de Lenguas Extranjeras en México 
Edith Hernández Méndez1* María del Rosario Reyes Cruz2** Universidad de Quintana Roo, Chetumal, Mexico 
In the case of Mexico, until recently, many universities focused mainly on teaching, but recent changes have led to new appointments in research, administration, and community service. There now seems to be, however, a view of the predominance of research in the academic environment. Therefore, the purpose of this paper was to examine and identify, through the lens of organizational theory and a current model of research culture in an academic setting, some characteristics of the research culture in the Department of Languages and Education at a public university in Southeast Mexico. Following the international tendencies and models in higher education, we see that the research culture observed in this university resembles more a market culture than other types of culture, although some traits of hierarchy culture provide cohesion in the organization. 
Key words: Foreign languages, higher education, research culture. 
En México, hasta hace algunas décadas, muchas universidades se enfocaban principalmente en la función de docencia. Sin embargo, recientemente se han dado cambios en la asignación de nuevas funciones: investigación, gestión y extensión. No obstante, la investigación parece tener actualmente un lugar preponderante en el ambiente académico. El propósito de este artículo es examinar e identificar, mediante la teoría de las organizaciones y un modelo actual de cultura de investigación en contextos académicos, algunas características de la cultura de la investigación en el Departamento de Lengua y Educación de una universidad pública del sureste mexicano. Siguiendo tendencias y modelos internacionales de educación superior, la cultura que se observa en esta universidad se asemeja más a una de mercado que a cualquiera de otro tipo, aunque algunos rasgos de la cultura jerárquica permiten la cohesión en la organización. 
Palabras clave: cultura de la investigación, educación superior, lenguas extranjeras. 
* E-mail: edith@uqroo.mx ** E-mail: rosreyes@uqroo.mx 
How to cite this article (APA, 6th ed.): Hernández Méndez, E., & Reyes Cruz, M. (2014). Research culture in higher education: The case of a foreign language department in Mexico. PROFILE Issues in Teachers’ Professional Development, 16(2), 135-150. http://dx.doi.org/10.15446/profile.v16n2.40819. This article was received on November 13, 2013, and accepted on May 15, 2014. 
135 PROFILE Vol. 16, No. 2, October 2014. ISSN 1657-0790 (printed) 2256-5760 (online). Bogotá, Colombia. Pages 135-150 
Hernández Méndez & Reyes Cruz 
Introduction In recent decades, an interesting research topic in education has been that of the academic career and the changing academic profession (Blackmore, Brennan, & Zipin, 2010; Brennan, 2006; Galaz Fontes & Gil Antón, 2009; Gil Antón, 2000; Grediaga, 2001; Schuster & Finkelstein, 2006). The university faculty today have a different profile and function than they had in the last century. There seems to be a view of the predominance of research in the academic environment as Schuster and Finkelstein (2006) point out: “A powerful countervailing trend is unmistakable: a clear faculty perception of the increasing importance of research and publication for purposes of promotion and tenure” (p. 129). Similarly, Layzell (1999), referring to the American faculty, claims: “faculty reward structures appear to be heavily geared toward research and scholarship” (p. 3). Others in the literature share this view as well, according to Rhoades (2000). 
In the particular case of Mexico, many universities used to focus mainly on teaching, but there has been a drastic change towards and emphasis on research, administration, and community service.1 Supported by some national and institutional policies (for example, the Program for Faculty Development—PROMEP, for its acronym in Spanish, and the introduction of an annual plan of activities for each professor, which has to be approved by the administration), faculty members in some public higher institutions are not only obliged to develop the four main functions (teaching, research, administration, and community service) but to maintain a balance amongst them. Interestingly, however, economic incentives and rewards are greatly skewed towards research and researchers. The National System of Researchers, (Sistema Nacional de Investigadores, 
1 The term “service” here coincides with the one used by Layzell (1999) in higher education: “Faculty work is comprised of instruction, research, and service activities” (p. 15). 
SNI) and the Productivity Reward Program (Beca de Desempeño al Personal Académico), for example, encourage faculty to conduct research and train new researchers by providing them with grants, scholarships, funding, and awards. Financial incentives have been the most appealing among faculty and, to some extent, have promoted an increase in research productivity at many universities in Mexico. 
These changes, of course, have not been pervasive in all universities and their implications are not alike in every institution. Some, such as the UNAM (Universidad Autónoma de México), have been traditionally strong research universities, and have conducted research since their origins. Nevertheless, largely, public state universities, which do not have a long historical past, are now dealing with these changes in the academic profession. A distinctive situation also occurs if we consider the different disciplines. Clark (1987) highlights the great influence a discipline has on research activity, and Rhoades (2000) claims that the institutional setting, the departmental and college settings shape faculty work. For example, faculty in the natural sciences have always embraced the function of research eagerly. Nonetheless, in other disciplines, such as modern languages, the focus had been traditionally on teaching. 
Although research on higher education’s changing environment in Mexico is now prolific (Chavoya, 2001; Estévez, 2007; Galaz Fontes, 2002; Galaz Fontes & Gil Antón, 2009; Gil Antón, 1994; Grediaga, 2001; Montero, 2011; Padilla, 2003; Parra, 2002), research concerning professors of modern languages or foreign language education, specifically, had been disregarded in Mexico until this decade when Encinas and Busseniers (2003) and RamírezRomero (2007, 2010, 2013) conducted studies which focused mainly on the research productivity of foreign language teaching and learning. 
There are very few studies concerning research carried out by modern language faculty and there 
Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Facultad de Ciencias Humanas, Departamento de Lenguas Extranjeras 136 
Research Culture in Higher Education: The Case of a Foreign Language Department in Mexico 
seems to be a gap in the literature regarding the research culture in which they are immersed or the research culture they wish to develop. While discussion in Mexico has revolved mainly around the changing academic career of faculty, there seems to be little concern for how these changes have occurred, how the faculty have responded to them, and what the institutions are doing with these changes. Therefore, the purpose of this paper is to examine and determine, through the lens of organizational theory and the model of the research culture of Salazar-Clemeña and Almonte-Acosta (2007), some characteristics of the research culture in a particular unit of analysis: the Department of Foreign Languages and Education at a public university in Southeast Mexico (one of the youngest public universities in Mexico). We intend to shed light on the idiosyncrasies of this department faculty and some university administrators with regard to research. Our interest is to clarify how the research culture is being shaped by these professors and administrators by means of an analysis of their responses to the current institutional research policies and agenda, the departmental conditions and the environment for research, the financial support for research, incentives offered, collaboration with colleagues from the same department or external colleagues, and their perception of the needs and challenges in research. 
The paper is organized into four sections. The first section examines organizational theory in relation to universities as organizational units. The second describes the research method used and details of participants, instrument, and data analysis. The third includes the findings and discussion of the categories of analysis, such as the policies, research agenda, work climate, incentives, and so forth. Finally, the conclusions are given although these can only be of a preliminary nature as further and more extensive research needs to be carried out. 
Organizational Theory In organizational theory, the interactionist approach focuses on the subjective meanings emerging from social interaction, that is, the organization of reality is interpreted by its members and an intersubjective world is shared and built among these members in the everyday life of the organization (Ahumada, 2001). This perspective emphasizes social action, language and communication, the construction of meanings, and the organizational culture in order to understand the social interaction. For the purpose of this paper, the organizational culture approach was used as we examined the perceptions, attitudes, and behaviors of some members of two groups (faculty and administrators), who play a very important role in this organizational unit. Additionally, the methodology proposed by this approach is more suitable for this research. Next, there is detailed information about this perspective. 
Organizational Culture Concerning the organizational culture, the concept of culture has been defined and redefined many times by scholars. Cameron (2008) argues that the agreement most discussions of organizational culture (Cameron & Ettington, 1988; O’Reilly & Chatman, 1996; Schein, 1996) has arrived at is that “culture is a socially constructed attribute of organizations which serves as the ‘social glue’ binding an organization together. [Culture represents] how things are around here or the prevailing ideology that people carry inside their heads” (Cameron, 2008, p. 3). 
As institutions, universities also develop an identity, values, attitudes, and beliefs. Some of them are explicit, and many are implicit; some are shared and others are group specific. This then means that in an organization, such as a university, culture is not always homogeneous. There are, therefore, different perspectives in approaching the organizational culture and these are discussed in detail below. 
137 PROFILE Vol. 16, No. 2, October 2014. ISSN 1657-0790 (printed) 2256-5760 (online). Bogotá, Colombia. Pages 135-150 
Hernández Méndez & Reyes Cruz 
Conceptual Frameworks 
of Organizational Culture Schein (1984, 1985, 1991) proposes three different levels for viewing organizational culture: 
Level 1. This consists of the artefacts and creations of the organization, such as symbols and rituals. 
Level 2. Here we have the consciously held values, beliefs, etc., that guide the behavior of the members of the organization. 
Level 3. This level makes up the unconscious ideas and beliefs deep-rooted in the employees of the organization. This is the essence of the organization and has the greatest influence on the individual’s behavior. 
According to Hatch (1993), Schein’s definition and conceptual framework remains the dominant ones for organizational culture studies. However, Martin and Meyerson (1988) claim that this approach has as its shortcoming the absence of comparing and contrasting the manifestation of ideas in actual practices and the perception of these by people outside the organization. Thus, triangulating information obtained about the cognitive component with artefacts and behaviors is recommended. 
An alternative paradigm is the competing values framework (Quinn & Rohrbaugh, 1983), which has been very useful in identifying and profiling the dominant cultures of organizations. This framework consists of two dimensions: vertical and horizontal. The vertical dimension differentiates cultures that emphasize flexibility, discretion, and dynamism from those which focus on stability, order, and control. Concerning the horizontal dimension, there are criteria that distinguish cultures, which focus on an internal orientation, integration, and unity from those which emphasize an external orientation, differentiation, and rivalry. These two dimensions together form four quadrants, each representing a distinct set of organizational culture: clan, adhocracy, market, and hierarchy. 
The clan culture is considered, according to Cameron (2008), as 
a friendly place to work where people share a lot of themselves. 
Leaders are thought of as mentors, coaches, and, perhaps, even as 
parent figures. . . . Success is defined in terms of internal climate 
and concern for people. (p. 435) 
Loyalty, tradition, and collaboration as well as commitment are valuable in this culture. For the organization, teamwork, participation, and consensus are very important. 
The adhocracy culture is perceived, following Cameron (2008), as “a dynamic, entrepreneurial, and creative workplace. . . . Effective leadership is visionary, innovative, and risk-oriented” (p. 35). In addition, commitment to experimentation and innovation are ideas shared by the members. The organization is very concerned about being at the leading edge of new knowledge, products, and/or services. Consequently, readiness for change and meeting new challenges are important. The organization’s long-term goal is on growing rapidly and acquiring new resources. 
A market culture is “a results-oriented workplace. Leaders are hard driving producers, directors, and competitors. . . . Outpacing the competition, escalating share price, and market leadership dominate the success criteria” (Cameron, 2008, pp. 35-36). Winning is the main goal of the organization. 
The hierarchy culture, according to Cameron (2008), 
is characterized as a formalised and structured place to work. 
Procedures and well-defined processes govern what people 
do. Effective leaders are good coordinators, organizers, and 
efficiency experts. Maintaining a smooth-running organization 
is important. The long-term concerns of the organization are 
stability, predictability, and efficiency. Formal rules and policies 
hold the organization together. (p. 36) 
Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Facultad de Ciencias Humanas, Departamento de Lenguas Extranjeras 138 
Research Culture in Higher Education: The Case of a Foreign Language Department in Mexico 
Given that in an organization such as a university we may observe some specificities or variation (as we are dealing with different people with probably different objectives), it seems that both frameworks—Schein’s definition of culture and the competing values framework (Quinn & Rohrbaugh, 1983)—can complement each other. At a higher institution, students, faculty, and administrators (with different statuses) can form subcultures, although there might also be a dominant culture. In this study, we consider the perspective of faculty and administrators, which can lead us toward identifying a more dominant culture or different subcultures. 
Research Culture in Academic Contexts Based on Schein’s (1984) definition of culture, we can say that a research culture is the shared, taken-for-granted implicit assumptions that members of a university hold about research. That also determines how they perceive, think about, and behave with respect to research activities. With 
regard to research culture in higher education, Meek and Davies (2009) point out that: 
Higher education institutions must provide a supportive 
environment if research is to flourish. In some developing 
countries, higher education institutions were originally established 
mainly to engage in teaching and it will take a good deal of effort 
and an appropriate policy environment to nourish a research 
culture. (p. 76) 
Salazar-Clemeña and Almonte-Acosta (2007) conducted a study whose aim was to understand the research culture from the perspective of faculty and how this affects the productivity of the faculty in some higher education institutions in the Philippines. They operationalized the construct research culture adopting indicators from previous studies (Bland & Ruffin as cited in Pratt, Margaritis, & Coy, 1999; De Haven, Wilson, & O’Connor-Kettlestrings, 1998; Dundar & Lewis, 1998). Table 1 lists these indicators below along with their operationalized definitions: 
Table 1. Indicators of a Research Culture (Based on Salazar-Clemeña & Almonte-Acosta, 2007, p. 4) 
Indicators Operationalized Definitions 
Institutional research policies and agenda 
Research agenda based on the institution’s philosophy, goals, mission and vision, as well as its research emphasis and strategies for supporting and promoting research. Departmental culture and working conditions 
Departmental research programs and strategies designed to encourage and sustain research productivity among the faculty and graduate students. Budget for research Funds allotted by the institution for research, ability of the institution and 
its departments to tap external sources and obtain research grants. Infrastructure Provision of a research unit, adequate research services, and facilities for the 
conduct of research. Collaboration with and access to research professionals in other institutions 
Ability to provide means for linkages with other institutions, local or international, in order to create intellectual synergy. 
Policies and guidelines on research benefits and incentives 
Rules and procedures on the granting of financial and non-financial rewards for research. Research committee Research monitoring body that screens the types of research conducted and 
looks into ethical dilemmas involved, especially in sensitive fields. 
Publications Quality and quantity of research produced by the faculty members. 
139 PROFILE Vol. 16, No. 2, October 2014. ISSN 1657-0790 (printed) 2256-5760 (online). Bogotá, Colombia. Pages 135-150 
Hernández Méndez & Reyes Cruz 
In addition to these indicators, Salazar-Clemeña and Almonte-Acosta (2007) point out the need to include three other components in the analysis: faculty workload; faculty knowledge, abilities, and attitudes to conduct research; and the institutional policies for research. All these together seem to be suitable elements for identifying the research culture of a higher education institution. Therefore, the organizational culture perspectives discussed above and these indicators which are particular to the research culture at a university, are guiding this study. 
Method The purpose of this research is descriptiveoriented, and we chose a public university in Southeast Mexico, and particularly the Department of Foreign Languages and Education as our unit of analysis, for this case study. We collected data by using a semi-structured interview whose questions were based on the framework proposed by Salazar-Clemeña and Almonte-Acosta (2007). Three institutional administrators (the Vice-president, the Dean of Graduate Studies and Research, and the Dean of Political Sciences and Humanities), and five faculty members (three women and two men; one professor and four associate professors) from our department were interviewed. The five faculty/researchers were selected by analysing first the whole department faculty research outputs, their profiles, and their membership to the two main research groups within the department. Then, only five representative members from the whole faculty were selected to obtain a range. 
We triangulated the data by using the interview contents from the administrators and the faculty members, organizational/institutional documents, and data on the faculty research outputs. The analysis and discussion were guided by the theoretical proposals by Salazar-Clemeña and Almonte-Acosta 
(2007), Schein (1984, 1985, 1991), and the competing values framework (Quinn & Rohrbaugh, 1983). 
Findings and Discussion This section is organized into three parts. First, we present and discuss the data obtained from the university administrators. Next, we do the same but this time with the faculty from the Department of Languages and Education. Finally, we compare and contrast both perspectives to shed light on the complex picture of the research culture in this organization. We develop the discussion considering the abovementioned theoretical perspectives. 
The Administrators’ Perspective 
Institutional Research Policies and Agenda There was no consensus among the administrators about the existence of a research agenda. Nonetheless, the three administrators mentioned the interest of the President and the Planning Office to encourage educational research (by means of financial support) in order to obtain data that are required by Higher Education accreditation organizations. All shared the idea that the research policies are agreed upon as needed, and they vary to some extent according to the authorities (the President, the Vice-president, or the Dean of Graduate Studies and Research), and some have been established differently in the departments; that is, some deans and heads of departments adapt these policies internally. They also agreed that academic freedom can also be observed in the research function. 
Departmental Culture and Working Conditions One administrator did not perceive the existence of subcultures within the institution, nor according to the disciplines, but two administrators believed that some disciplines are more oriented towards research while others are inclined toward 
Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Facultad de Ciencias Humanas, Departamento de Lenguas Extranjeras 140 
Research Culture in Higher Education: The Case of a Foreign Language Department in Mexico 
more teaching or community service activities. Two administrators distinguished two sets of professors in the institution: (1) those that have a doctoral degree, have a high level of research output, are more oriented to research, and are members of the SNI; and (2) those who have only a master’s degree, limited research skills, and devote more time to teaching or community service. They also agreed that this situation has led the teachers to experience some discontent due to the existing external and internal incentives—mainly economic ones—that are intended to reward and stimulate the faculty’s research productivity. We should mention that teaching does not encourage the same level of compensation as research. 
To encourage and sustain research productivity, the institution promotes among the faculty their evaluation and accreditation in national programs such as the SNI, the PROMEP from the Mexican Ministry of Education, and the Productivity Reward Program. Although participation in these programs is “optional,” the institution values members in the SNI mainly because they conform to an indicator for rankings and for the authorization of federal funds. One administrator mentioned that some faculty are more interested in research because that is the more rewarded function, and she suggested that there should be a balance in the incentives considering also teaching, administration, and community service. 
One administrator acknowledged that faculty in the Department of Foreign Languages and Education have traditionally been devoted to teaching and some are now coping with difficulties conducting research because of their limited knowledge and skills. He believes that some need more help and that the more experienced professors can actually integrate them into the research projects, but he thinks that doing research is also of a personal interest and not everyone has such an interest. Thus, 
some teachers only do what they are required to do, which is to produce at least one publication a year. 
Budget for Research According to two administrators, professors are expected to obtain financial support from external organizations to conduct research. However, this has been observed to be a difficult task for the faculty. They attributed this situation to the excessive paperwork and the lack of interest on behalf of the professors. Given that some type of research can be carried out with few resources, some faculty members are not motivated to seek this external financial support. However, being the leader of a project with external financial support is highly respectable and is looked upon favorably by researchers and the institution. The Department of Languages and Education is perceived by the administrators as a department with incipient research projects that are externally financed. 
Institutionally, there are grants to conduct small-scale research projects for faculty members, and grants for graduate and undergraduate students’ writing of their theses. This strategy has increased the rate of graduation, which is highly valued by the institution for rankings, accreditation and funding. 
Federal funds are also provided to all the existing research groups in the institution in order to defray the costs of visiting scholars as well as visits to other institutions. All administrators agreed that faculty rarely complain about funding for research. 
Infrastructure Only one administrator highlighted the lack of infrastructure for the graduate programs. A lack of communication between faculty members and the department in charge of infrastructure seemed evident. The university does not have a research building; faculty work in their own offices and some 
141 PROFILE Vol. 16, No. 2, October 2014. ISSN 1657-0790 (printed) 2256-5760 (online). Bogotá, Colombia. Pages 135-150 
Hernández Méndez & Reyes Cruz 
adequate research resources such as databases are available, although one participant pointed out there are “not enough and most of them are not specialised.” However, the administrators said that the faculty do not complain about this situation. 
Collaboration With and Access to Research 
Professionals in Other Institutions The administrators agreed that collaboration with external colleagues is increasing, but they consider this as part of the faculty’s responsibility. There are some grants for visits to other institutions, but they are very limited. Faculty usually invite or visit external colleagues using external financing. 
Policies and Guidelines on Research Benefits and Incentives The participants agreed that incentives are mainly pecuniary, although sometimes they may consist of payment for the publication of a book, grants for travelling, fewer instruction hours, or a better office, among other reasons. However, these rewards are assigned with discretion. With regard to the financial rewards, the national programs have explicit guidelines and rules. All the requirements are clearly stated as well as the procedures of evaluation. These programs classify researchers in different levels or ranks, each one implying different requirements and productivity: the higher the rank, the more money researchers receive. 
Research Committee The administrators acknowledged the absence of a research committee in the institution, which supervises the processes of research and ensures ethical standards of research involving human subjects. They are not aware how researchers in the institution ensure that the rights of research participants are protected. 
Publications There was partial agreement among the administrators that the most common type of publication in the institution is book chapters followed by journal papers. They all perceive a rise in the number of publications of the whole faculty in recent years, but there is a shared belief that proceedings and book chapters (published by the same university) are the most prolific ones because they imply less time and effort. 
The Faculty 
Institutional Research Policies and Agenda No institutional research agenda is known among the professors, although they perceive there is an interest in developing educational research, as funding has been lately provided for projects in this field. Two professors are unaware of the university’s research lines or its mission and vision with regard to research. 
The research policies are associated mainly with budget distribution among the different research groups, and the distribution of instructional workload, research, community service, and administration. With regard to the former, in the Department of Languages and Education there are two research groups which get some funding from the Federal Government. However, not everyone is part of a research group and these people do not have access to these funds. Additionally, professors in a research group can be members or collaborators,2 and one professor in the interview mentioned that she, as a collaborator, has not received any financial support. 
2 Members are officially registered in the Ministry of Education, and they are compelled to demonstrate productivity and to be evaluated; collaborators are not officially registered. 
Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Facultad de Ciencias Humanas, Departamento de Lenguas Extranjeras 142 
Research Culture in Higher Education: The Case of a Foreign Language Department in Mexico 
As to the workload distribution, this varies according to the faculty academic rank. In the Department there are “professors” and “associate professors”. According to one institutional policy, the former have fewer student contact hours and can devote more time for research. Associate professors are assigned more instruction hours and the time allocated to conduct research is reduced. Consequently, the institutional demands of research outputs are also different: Associate professors are compelled to produce one publication annually, while professors must produce at least two publications. All the professors interviewed expressed agreement with this policy, but their main concern was the time dedicated to administrative issues, which consume longer than the amount of hours institutionally allotted for this function. This is what one associate professor, who is also a coordinator of a Master’s program, said regarding this: 
Out of my 40 hours, 12 or 15 are devoted to teaching; and a similar 
amount is dedicated to administration. I work all mornings doing 
that, and I do research at home, at nights or very late at night if 
I am still in the mood . . . I’d like to have more time for research 
because, at the same time, that would help me to improve my 
teaching. (Female associate) 
Similarly, the policy regarding the time for course preparation seems to be unacceptable by the faculty since they perceive the time to be insufficient for this task (half an hour per course hour). The policy of distribution of time per function is perceived by most of the interviewees as inefficient, unreal, and unreasonable. The faculty mentioned that some implications of these policies can be observed in a reduction of research output or its quality as well as in the quality of teaching or less student/tutors contact hours. Let us see below two faculty members’ reflections: 
I think I should dedicate more time to teaching, and I guess I 
don’t do it because I spend more time thinking about research. 
(Male associate) 
I devote less time to tutoring and community service...and there 
are many administration issues that just come up...they hadn’t 
been planned previously and the faculty has to do them with no 
excuse and at that precise moment. (Female professor) 
Given that the institution evaluates the faculty performance every year taking into consideration teaching, tutoring, administration, and community service, and their contract depends on this, faculty feel pressed and find this situation very stressful. This performance contract for all faculties has been a policy in this university since 2005, and faculty in this department did not complain about it. 
Departmental Culture and Working Conditions There is a feeling among faculty that the administration is not supportive at all of their research activity. One of them said, “Nobody cares if I do research or not as long as I meet the requirement of one publication.” 
Three faculty members agreed they feel motivated to do research and enjoy this activity. They also believe that teaching has been neglected to a certain extent not only because faculty are tending to prefer research, but also because administrative issues and community service consume a lot of time. Two faculty members (both hold masters’ degrees) said they do not feel motivated to conduct research; they prefer teaching and feel the need to learn more about how to do research. One notable difference between all these faculty members is their research productivity and the rewards they receive. The first three receive monetary incentives through several programs. Conversely, the second two receive very little or no incentive at all, because teaching is not rewarded as well as research is and this is the activity to which they devote more time. 
143 PROFILE Vol. 16, No. 2, October 2014. ISSN 1657-0790 (printed) 2256-5760 (online). Bogotá, Colombia. Pages 135-150 
Hernández Méndez & Reyes Cruz 
Mentoring among the faculty members3 (with regard to research) does take place in the Department, according to the faculty interviewed, but it is not a pervasive practice. They pointed out that factors such as personality, interests, benefits, or drawbacks affect the mentoring, and some highlighted that mentoring is very time-consuming. Two of them agreed that mentoring is very helpful, and they would like this to be institutionalized to avoid the informality and to encourage the “experts” to mentor. 
Other subgroups and subcultures identified are the research groups, which derived from a national policy of the Ministry of Education. Faculty members who share one or two lines of research and who work collaboratively among themselves form the research groups at this university. In the Department of Languages and Education, there are two research groups to which most of the faculty belong. However, some faculty members work individually because their interests do not match those of the existing research groups or because of other personal issues. The faculty interviewed perceive collaboration between research groups as nonexistent; only some sporadic activities have been carried out together. They all agreed that although both groups share some research topics, they tend not to work collaboratively. 
Budget for Research There is a belief among some faculty that there is a tendency to benefit one research group over the other, or to favor members instead of collaborators. Most of them agreed that the budget allotted for research is insufficient for everyone, but they suggested that with a rotation system everybody could benefit. One interviewee, comparing this 
3 We understand mentoring as the help that a more experienced researcher provides a less experienced colleague to conduct research. 
situation with other public universities, emphasized that “here we have much better conditions.” 
Infrastructure Some highlighted the need for specialized software or databases. They have solved this problem by getting external financing. In general, they think the infrastructure is adequate in the institution. 
Collaboration With and Access to Research Professionals in Other Institutions Collaboration with research professionals is incipient yet seems to be increasing slowly. Both research groups are working with colleagues from other universities, who they contact or get to know at conferences. Mobility is almost non-existent in the department and they accept the need to do more about it. 
Policies and Guidelines on Research Benefits and Incentives The function of research and the granting of non-financial rewards (e.g., recognition) for research are not important for the Head of the Department, according to the faculty. For her or him, the research activity seems to be a responsibility of the academic unit, the graduate studies and research office rather than that of the department, which concentrates more on teaching, community service activities, and administration. The faculty agreed that the policies and guidelines on research benefits and incentives (external) are transparent and precise. 
Research Committee No research committee exists in the institution, according to the informants. Each researcher individually does or does not consider ethical issues in the conduction of research. The more experienced researchers are more aware of the great magni
Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Facultad de Ciencias Humanas, Departamento de Lenguas Extranjeras 144 
Research Culture in Higher Education: The Case of a Foreign Language Department in Mexico 
tude of research ethics, and suggest the institution should have a research committee. 
Publications All agreed that the most frequently published product is conference proceedings, followed by book chapters, and then peer reviewed or referred articles (mainly national, but increasingly international). They believe that proceedings are a less rigorous academic product and less time-consuming. On the other hand, book chapters are more abundant than journal papers because there is a budget in the academic unit assigned for the publication of books. However, books co-edited or published by other institutions and in which faculty of this department participate, are still at an embryonic stage. 
Integrating the Administrators’ and the Faculty’s Perspectives Following Salazar-Clemeña and AlmonteAcosta’s (2007) model, the research culture in this department seems to be still in process. So far, various factors such as the policies (national and institutional), the rewards structures, and the knowledge, skills and interests of the faculty have been identified as the ones shaping this research culture. Whether interacting with others or alone, each factor seems to have an effect on the research activity. 
Some administrators distinguished two types of faculty members: those who favor research more over the others, and those who show a tendency to favor teaching. Similarly, faculty manifested both tendencies: some said they prefer and devote more time to research whereas others expressed a preference for teaching and administration. Interestingly, this preference has to do with their academic rank, academic profile, and the incentives they get. The higher the rank, the higher the academic profile, and the more incentives they 
get, the preference is towards research. However, this tendency does not mean a lack of interest in research by those who do less research activity. They acknowledged the need to conduct research and are willing to do it if mentoring and time are provided. Some of them recognized they need more training to conduct research, but very little is done in this regard, institutionally speaking, since provision of courses or workshops with experts, or policies to adjust the workload distribution are not part of the organizational agenda. 
Time, precisely, seems to be perceived by all faculty interviewed as the main factor that affects the research activity. The policies on the workload distribution seem not be working for anyone, and one function at least seems to be neglected. It is unlikely for faculty members to have a performance balance in all the functions, as the institutional policy establishes. Those who conduct research claimed they needed to work extra time because it is a very demanding task. All faculty members agreed that administration is usually the function that takes much more time than that allotted by the institution. 
With regard to the rewards, most of the financial rewards or incentives are oriented toward research and perceived by the administrators and some faculty as motivating and encouraging. Faculty members feel stimulated to conduct research because, besides the financial reward, they get more recognition and respect in academia. Actually, rewards for teaching are very limited and the institution itself does not have any other way to acknowledge this function. Although one administrator and one faculty member expressed their discontent with these policies and suggested there should be also incentives for the other functions, the general goal seems to be to increase and sustain research in the institution because it is apparently beneficial for everyone: Faculty can participate in 
145 PROFILE Vol. 16, No. 2, October 2014. ISSN 1657-0790 (printed) 2256-5760 (online). Bogotá, Colombia. Pages 135-150 
Hernández Méndez & Reyes Cruz 
incentives and reward programs, and the institution, in terms of accountability and funding, benefits if more research and tangible outputs are evidenced. 
This reward structure seems to be working well for only some of the professors who have the knowledge and skills, although they do not always have all the time needed, and they have to make efforts and work extra time to get the research done. However, there are some faculty members who admit to having a lack of knowledge and skills, and some even lack enthusiasm towards conducting research. For these, some research incentives may be accessible but in a very limited way because they need to compete with other more experienced researchers (there are institutional and national incentive programs), and the research outputs are evaluated quantitatively and qualitatively. Although there seems to be some discontent among the people interviewed, this does not apply for everyone. Two of them mentioned that nobody complains overtly about this issue although they disagree with the type of incentives and the procedures followed. As to the budget and infrastructure to conduct research, perceptions of faculty and administrators coincided in their saying that although it is by no means the ideal situation, the resources so far are adequate. This response probably has to do, on the one hand, with the fact that the institution promotes faculty participation in national programs, which provide funding for research. Being the leader of a national financed research project entails prestige in the incentive programs and among the faculty and the institutional administration. It is now common practice to see a colleague’s picture in the university’s newsletter or its web page who garners respect for having received external funding for a research project. Thus, some professors feel motivated to submit proposals to get external financial support and to be able to conduct research that is more sophisticated. 
On the other hand, some faculty who do not participate in these programs, or if they do their proposal is not accepted, may just conduct research that does not need a lot of investment: some books or updated papers, fieldwork at the same institution, and ideas from their everyday classes. 
Since a research agenda is not explicitly known, no one is obliged to participate or be responsible for a research project, although it is highly recommended and recognized, and faculty are increasingly doing it. This issue is interesting because, apparently, research in this department emerged more because of a national policy or an international trend towards “research universities” rather than because of a conviction of the role and benefits that research can bring to society. Throughout the interviews, nobody mentioned why research became another function for the faculty and an interest for the institution. 
Although the Development Plan of the university (Universidad de Quintana Roo, 2013) does highlight some research lines (education is one of them), their scope is so wide that everything can fit in. The fact that some faculty are unaware of these lines tells us how important they are for the institution. Faculty members are free to do research (unless they have a project of a particular national or state program): they choose the topics, the problem, and methodology, the people to work with, the times, and so forth. Although there is an institutional policy for faculty to assess their research activity annually (one publication per year for associate professors, and two for professors), quality is irrelevant as it is not evaluated. It seems, therefore, that the only concern is the quantity, a way to show that the institution is doing research for accountability purposes. 
This preoccupation for quantity and not for quality can also be observed in the lack of institutional support for training faculty in research 
Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Facultad de Ciencias Humanas, Departamento de Lenguas Extranjeras 146 
Research Culture in Higher Education: The Case of a Foreign Language Department in Mexico 
matters. Faculty members are required to publish and it is taken for granted they know how to do it. However, one administrator and two professors pointed out that, in general, faculty in language programs had been focused traditionally on teaching, but with the new policies, they now have to do research. However, not everybody is interested or has the skills to conduct research. 
As the institution seemingly does not help these professors to become researchers, we wanted to know if among the colleagues there was some type of mentoring or help, or guidance from the more experienced ones. However, it was evidenced through the interviews that mentoring is not taking place ordinarily in this department; people are collaborating mainly only with others with similar research experience. Professors claimed that mentoring other colleagues is very time-consuming and this would yield less research outputs (consequently, loss of pecuniary incentives, less prestige, and so on). If this activity were to be rewarded, they said they would do it. Collaboration between the research groups also seems absent, although they may share some topics or research problems. 
Considering the competing values framework (Quinn & Rohrbaugh, 1983), the research culture in this department can be identified more as a market culture since it is a results-oriented workplace. However, some features of the hierarchy culture can also be observed. For example, formal rules and policies (derived mainly from national policies) hold the organization together. Although procedures and processes have not been well defined, they govern what people do. The incentive structure can actually be thought of as the guideline for academic life in the institution. There is an emphasis on success or “winning” measured by rates, means, rank, level, and so forth. Competition is not only outside 
the university, but also inside. High research productivity is considered the most valuable asset and a symbol of prestige and success. Nonetheless, the quality and impact of the research conducted does not seem to be something faculty or representatives think about. 
Conclusions Following the international tendencies and models in higher education, the culture observed in this public university in Southeast Mexico resembles more a market culture than any other type of culture, although some traits of hierarchy culture provide cohesion to the organization. 
Overall, research is perceived as just another function of the workload, as more work to be done; there was scarce evidence of a genuine interest in knowledge, in learning, in advancing, in looking at research as something that can benefit society in general. 
An attitude of passiveness towards the ongoing changes, the new policies, and regulations in both administrators and faculty could be observed. Decisions seem to be made without consensus, without the inclusion of the different participants, and the decisions are rarely questioned. The structure of incentives (not only institutional but national) plays a decisive role, as well as policies, rules and procedures which are used as instruments to have faculty conduct research and, above all, to have products for accountability reports. Faculty members respond to them according to their individual attributes, which segments the culture into two main subcultures: the set of faculty qualified and inclined to conduct research, and those whose academic profiles limit them for research. However, there is no cultivation of mentoring, coaching or of leaders caring for others. This makes the culture more competitive and individualistic. 
147 PROFILE Vol. 16, No. 2, October 2014. ISSN 1657-0790 (printed) 2256-5760 (online). Bogotá, Colombia. Pages 135-150 
Hernández Méndez & Reyes Cruz 
References Ahumada, L. A. (2001). Teoría y cambio en las organizaciones: un acercamiento desde los modelos de aprendizaje organizacional [Theory and change in organizations: an approach from organizational learning]. Valparaíso, CL: Universidad Católica de Valparaíso. Blackmore, J., Brennan, M., & Zipin, L. (Eds.). (2010). Repositioning university governance and academic work. Rotterdam, NL: Sense Publishers. Brennan, J. (2006). The changing academic profession: The driving forces. In RIHE (Ed.), Reports of the changing academic profession project workshop on quality, relevance, and governance in the changing academia: International perspectives (pp. 37-44). Hiroshima, JP: Research Institute for Higher Education. Hiroshima University. Cameron, K. (2008). A process for changing organizational culture. In T. G. Cummings, (Ed.), Handbook of organization development (pp. 429-446). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Cameron, K., & Ettington, D. R. (1988). The conceptual foundations of organizational culture. In J. C. Smart (Ed.), Higher education: Handbook of theory and research (pp. 356-396). New York, NY: Agathon. Chavoya, M. L. (2001). Organización del trabajo y culturas académicas. Estudio de dos grupos de investigadores de la Universidad de Guadalajara [Organization of academic and work cultures: A study of the research groups at Universidad de Guadalajara]. Revista Mexicana de Investigación Educativa, 6(11), 79-93. Clark, B. R. (1987). The academic life: Small worlds, different worlds. Princeton, NJ: The Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. De Haven, M. J., Wilson, G. R., & O’Connor-Kettlestrings, P. (1998). Creating a research culture: What can we learn from residencies that are successful in research. Educational Research and Methods, 30(7), 501-507. Dundar, H., & Lewis, D. R. (1998). Determinants of research productivity in higher education. Research in Higher Education, 39(6), 607-630. 
Encinas, F., & Busseniers, P. (2003). ELT in higher education in Mexico: Developing professionally. Paper presented at the Qualitative Research Conference, British Council, Mexico DF, Mexico. Estévez, E. (2007). Entre lo que parecemos y lo que somos. Pensamiento de académicos y lógica institucional ante las políticas públicas para la formación disciplinar de profesores en México: Universidad de Sonora, 1980-2004 [What we seem and what we are. Academics’ thoughts and institutional logic towards public policies for the disciplinary development of professors in Mexico] (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Centro de Investigación y Estudios Avanzados del Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Ciudad de México. Galaz Fontes, J. (2002). Job satisfaction of Mexican faculty in a public state university: Institutional reality through the lens of the professoriate (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Claremont Graduate University, USA. Galaz Fontes, J., & Gil Antón, M. (2009). La profesión académica en México: un oficio en proceso de reconfiguración [The academic profession in Mexico: A job in process of reconfiguration]. Revista Electrónica de Investigación Educativa, 11(2), 1-30. Gil Antón, M. (1994). Los rasgos de la diversidad, un estudio sobre los académicos mexicanos [Diversity characteristics, a study of Mexican academics]. México, MX: UAM-Azcapotzalco. Gil Antón, M. (2000). Los académicos en los noventa: ¿actores, sujetos, espectadores o rehenes? [The academics in the 90’s: Actors, subjects, spectators, or hostages?] Revista Electrónica de Investigación Educativa, 2(1). Retrieved from http://redie.uabc.mx/vol2no1/ contenido-gil.html Grediaga, K. (2001). Retos y condiciones de desarrollo: la profesión académica en México en la última década [Challenges and conditions for development: The academic profession in Mexico during the last decade]. Revista Mexicana de Investigación Educativa, 6(11), 95-117. 
Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Facultad de Ciencias Humanas, Departamento de Lenguas Extranjeras 148 
Research Culture in Higher Education: The Case of a Foreign Language Department in Mexico 
Hatch, M. (1993). The dynamics of organizational culture. 
Academy of Management Review, 18(4), 657-693. Layzell, D. (1999). Higher education’s changing environment: Faculty productivity and the reward structure. In W. G. Tierney (Ed.), Faculty productivity: Facts, fictions, and issues (pp. 3-37). New York, NY: Falmer. Martin, J., & Meyerson, D. (1988). Organizational cultures and the denial, channeling, and acknowledgement of ambiguity. In L. Pondy, R. Boland, & H. Thomas (Eds.), Managing ambiguity and change (pp. 93-125). New York, NY: Wiley. Meek, V. L., & Davies, D. (2009). Policy dynamics in higher education and research: Concepts and observations. In L. Meek, U. Teichler, & M. Kearney (Eds.), Higher education research and innovation (pp. 41-82). Paris, FR: UNESCO. Montero, V. (2011). The construction of professional identity pathways of the participation of full time faculty members in university restructuring in Mexico (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of California, Riverside, USA. O’Reilly, C. A., & Chatman, J. A. (1996). Culture as social control: Corporations, cults, and commitment. In B. M. Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior (pp. 157-200). Connecticut, USA: JAI Press. Padilla, L. (2003). Faculty academic socialization: Strengthening the academic profession in Mexico. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Claremont Graduate University, USA. Parra, M. (2002). La profesión académica: perspectivas comparadas [The academic profession: Compared perspectives] (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). CENDES, Caracas, Venezuela. Pratt, M., Margaritis, D., & Coy, D. (1999). Developing a research culture in a university faculty. Journal of Higher Education Policy and Management, 21(1), 43-55. Quinn, R. E., & Rohrbaugh, J. (1983). A spatial model of effectiveness criteria: Towards a competing values 
approach to organizational analysis. Management Science, 29(3), 363-377. Ramírez-Romero, J. L. (Ed). (2007). Las investigaciones sobre la enseñanza y el aprendizaje de lenguas extranjeras en México [Research in foreign language teaching and learning in Mexico]. Ciudad de México, MX: Plaza y Valdés. Ramírez-Romero, J. L. (Ed). (2010). Las investigaciones sobre la enseñanza de las lenguas extranjeras en México: una segunda mirada. [Research in foreign language teaching in Mexico: A second glance]. Ciudad de México, MX: Cengage Learning. Ramírez-Romero, J. L. (Ed). (2013). Una década de búsqueda: las investigaciones sobre la enseñanza y el aprendizaje de lenguas extranjeras en México (2000-2011) [A decade of searching: Research in foreign language teaching and learning in Mexico]. Ciudad de México, MX: Pearson, UNAM, & Universidad de Colima. Rhoades, G. (2000). The changing role of faculty. In J. Losco & B. Fife (Eds.), Higher education in transition: The challenges of the new millennium (pp. 29-50). Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group. Salazar-Clemeña, R. M., & Almonte-Acosta S. A. (2007). Developing research culture in Philippine higher education institutions: Perspectives of university faculty. Paper presented at the Regional Seminar “Competition, Cooperation, and Change in the Academic Profession: Shaping Higher Education’s Contribution to Knowledge and Research,” Hangzhou, China. Paris, FR: UNESCO Forum. Retrieved from http://unesdoc. unesco.org/images/0015/001578/157869e.pdf Schein, E. H. (1984). Coming to a new awareness of organizational culture. Sloan Management Review, 25, 3-16. Schein, E. H. (1985). Organizational culture and leadership. 
San Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass Schein, E. H. (1991). What is culture? In P. Frost, L. Morre, M. Louis, C. Lundberg, & J. Martin (Eds.), Reframing organizational culture (pp. 243-253). San Francisco, CA: Sage. 
149 PROFILE Vol. 16, No. 2, October 2014. ISSN 1657-0790 (printed) 2256-5760 (online). Bogotá, Colombia. Pages 135-150 
Hernández Méndez & Reyes Cruz 
Schein, E. H. (1996). Culture: The missing concept in organizational studies. Administrative Science Quarterly, 41(2), 229-240. Schuster, J. H., & Finkelstein, M. J. (2006). The American faculty: The restructuring of academic work and careers. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University. 
Universidad de Quintana Roo. (2013). Plan estratégico de desarrollo institucional (2013-2016) [Plan of Institutional Development, 2013-2016]. Quintana Roo, MX: Author. 
About the Authors Edith Hernández Méndez holds a PhD in Hispanic Linguistics from Ohio State University, USA. She is a full time professor at Universidad de Quintana Roo and member of the National System of Researchers in Mexico. Her research interests include language acquisition, language learning and teaching, and sociolinguistics. 
María del Rosario Reyes Cruz holds a PhD in International Education from Universidad Autónoma de Tamaulipas, Mexico. She is a full time professor at Universidad de Quintana Roo and member of the National System of Researchers in Mexico. Her research interests include pedagogical beliefs, epistemological beliefs, beliefs about language learning, and educational technology. 
Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Facultad de Ciencias Humanas, Departamento de Lenguas Extranjeras 150
﻿Environment and Planning A 2000, volume 32, pages 165 ^ 181 
DOI:10.1068/a3243 
The cultural role of universities in the community: revisiting the university ^ community debate 
Paul Chatterton CURDS, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 7RU, England; e-mail: Paul.Chatterton@newcastle.ac.uk Received 17 March 1999; in revised form 23 July 1999 
Abstract. In this paper the interaction between the university and the community is addressed. Whilst previous work has concentrated on the economic roles of universities in the community, insufficient attention has been paid to their cultural roles. Drawing upon fieldwork undertaken in Bristol, United Kingdom, I highlight a number of cultural roles which universities undertake in the community. In particular I outline the historical development of the cultural role of the university through a shift from the high-cultural role of the elite university to a broader cultural role for the contemporary mass university. A new environment for universities, including the declining influence of national structures, the interplay of processes of localisation and globalisation, and the emergence of new regional governance structures in Britain, is reshaping the cultural relationship between the university and the community and is opening up new possibilities for the creation of a closer, and more equal, relationship between them. This in turn could open up new possibilities for a greater sense of a shared public culture and address the evolving idea of the university. However, concerns are raised in relation to how these are affected by the introduction of globalisation practices and discourses into the university. 
Introduction In this paper I revisit the debate concerning the relationship between universities and communities. Although this is not a new debate, it has been one of renewed interest in recent years (for example, see Bender, 1988; 1998; DfEE, 1998; Elliott et al, 1996; Goddard, 1997a; 1997b; Goddard et al, 1994; Hall, 1997; National Committee of Inquiry into Higher Education, 1997; Robson et al, 1995; van der Wusten, 1998). However, in the study of the university^community relationship, much attention has focused on the economic impact of universities, through, for example, the exploration of technology transfer or by building econometric impact models. In this paper I will attempt to go beyond such work by analysing the cultural roles of universities. 
Within this framework, the paper has a number of objectives. First, I explore briefly the history and nature of the university^community cultural interface, especially in terms of the declining role which universities play in the process of nation-state building. Second, I explore the changing environment within which this interface is currently being developed, especially in terms of the interplay between localisation and globalisation which is creating a new framework for the funding and regulation both of universities and of cultural activity. In light of this new framework, in the third section I map some of the cultural relationships evident between universities and their communities which encompass the traditional high-cultural role of the elite university, and the more diverse cultural roles of the `mass university'.(1) Fourth, I discuss some of the implications of the evolving cultural relationship between the university and the community, especially in light of a new framework for engagement within which universities can play a more local and regional role and contribute to a greater sense of local public 
(1) The paper stems from research undertaken at the two universities in the city of Bristol in the southwest of England: the `old' red-brick University of Bristol dating back to the late 19th century; and the University of the West of England (UWE), formerly Bristol Polytechnic and one of Britain's many `new' post-1992 universities. 
166 P Chatterton 
culture. Although the paper is restricted to the context of Britain, by highlighting a number of processes which are occurring across national boundaries, hopefully it has a wider resonance. 
The university ^ community cultural interface Traditionally universities have been regarded as detached from the community. They have been seen as `in', rather than `of', a locality (Bender, 1998; Goddard et al, 1994), have largely been linked to international and national academic and research communities, have enjoyed high levels of institutional autonomy by nationally regulated, assessed, and funded systems of higher education, and have met the needs of a nationally oriented labour market and research agenda. In this sense, Bender (1988, page 294) observed: ``The university has always claimed the world, not its host city, as its domain. Whatever its local roots, the university historically has striven for learning that at least reaches toward universal significance''. 
Moreover, over the last century they have played a crucial role in nation-state identity building (Readings, 1996) and, in this context, have played an important role in the development of cultural values and infrastructures at a national level. In particular, from the late 19th century onwards, a nationally organised cultural infrastructure emerged in Britain comprising institutions such as museums, orchestras, theatre companies, and professional associations, which maintained certain cultural hierarchies. ``At the apex of this system were the universities, authorised to validate, inculcate, andöwithin limitsöexpand the high-culture artistic, musical and literary canons'' (DiMaggio, 1991, page 141). Culturally, then, the role of many civic, redbrick universities in Britain's old industrial cities was that of the `keepers of the canons', who have influence over the definition of `official' culture by disseminating cultural hierarchies in the fields in which they provide instruction (page 138). 
The old universities had a specific cultural role in that they ``trained specialists in high culture, established and renewed canons in several art forms, and inculcated in students an awareness and respect for the products of high-culture worlds'' (DiMaggio, 1991, page 148). In this sense, one role of the university was to produce an `art habitus' through which students were equipped with certain competencies and values to decipher works of art (Lash, 1989, page 196). 
As part of this national and institution-based cultural infrastructure, the old universities maintained three boundaries: between canonised and commercial culture, between people of `taste' and the masses, and between the arts specialists and the commercial bureaucrats (DiMaggio, 1991, page 141). This type of `culture', in an Arnoldian sense `the best that has been thought and said in the world', is evident in the university curriculum through courses such as Fine Art, Art History, Drama and Music, and facilities such as university museums, concert halls, theatre and art collections. Historically universities have played a role in the dichotomy between two cultural orders: 
``Official culture, preserved in art galleries, museums and university courses, demands cultivated tastes and a formally imparted knowledge. It demands moments of attention that are separated from the run of daily life. Popular culture, meanwhile, mobilizes the tactile, the incidental, the transitory, the expendable, the visceral'' (Worpole, quoted in Frow, 1995, page 67). This particular form of cultural authority largely reflects the national and international priorities of universities and its dissemination of high culture to the community as part of the paternalistic, civilising mission of higher education. This philanthropic role largely enriched the bourgeois public sphere and was not intended to reflect local culture: 
The cultural role of universities in the community 167 
``... the university has performed a dual role: one being of assurance and ceremony, a symbol of continuity and influence, with all the ritual of robes and maces on civic occasions; the other being a more active role of disseminating cultureöthrough its museums and special collections .... Yet neither the ceremonial nor the cultural aspects of local contact were designed to bridge the gap between town and gown ... nor did these functions do much to assuage the prejudices of a citizenry who have continued to see it all as a case of us and them'' (Hardy, 1996, page 12). Moreover, as the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD, 1982, page 31) commented: 
``The notion that the university should participate in the cultural development of the region is relatively recent. Up to now, education systems have mainly helped to promote a dominant national culture at the expense of local or minority subcultures ... systems of higher education exert rather a function of national homogenisation than one of local or regional differentiation.'' 
A changing interface This traditional cultural role of the university was a product of a specific set of historical circumstances related to a nationally framed education and cultural infrastructure. Universities now face a new set of circumstances which is changing their cultural relationship with the community.(2) These circumstances can be understood as a number of push and pull factors which, considered together, are encouraging universities to engage more with their locality or region. However, at the same time, universities are also being exposed to greater levels of globalisation and are increasingly connected to the nonlocal and the translocal. In sum, territoriality is a complex issue for universities. 
First, in terms of push factors, recent changes in higher education (HE) policy in the United Kingdom are encouraging universities to engage more with regions. In particular, a number of recent policy documents have set out the case for greater university-regional engagement (for example, Goddard et al, 1994; National Committee of Inquiry into Higher Education, 1997; Robson et al, 1997). There are also new government funding streams for regional engagement such as the Higher Education Regional Development Fund (HERD) and the Higher Education Reach Out to Business and the Community Fund (HERO-BC). Further, the Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE) will provide universities with a premium within its funding formula which recognises success in recruitment of students from locally disadvantaged backgrounds, and further funds will be provided to encourage links with local schools and Further Education colleges. Such changes, in addition to the increase in stay-at-home students as the financial burden of going to university shifts from the state onto the individual, equate to university populations more closely representing local populations. Staff profiles are also changing within universities, especially within the newer universities, owing to a decline in the number of tenured academics and the rise in contract researchers. In sum, university staff and student populations are no longer drawn from a limited geographical and social group. 
Moreover, new layers of government within the United Kingdom are creating opportunities for universities to engage with their localities. Although debates concerning the declining regulatory capacity of the nation-state may be overstated, the region, or locality, is increasingly seen as an important unit for territorial development 
(2) In particular it is important to note that half of the universities in Britain only became universities in 1992 and the number of HE students has nearly doubled over the last decade to nearly 2 million. 
168 P Chatterton 
and governance. This increasing role for regions is reinforced by devolution in the United Kingdom and the establishment of Regional Development Agencies (RDAs) in England. Working relationships are likely to develop between RDAs and universities owing to their mutual remits for technology transfer, skills provision, and regional economic development (Benneworth, 1999, page 15). Such relationships are being forged through representation of several universities on RDA boards, RDA responsibility for HERD Funds, university inputs into regional economic strategies and university ^ RDA inputs into regional innovation strategies. 
In terms of cultural activity, the representation of the Department of Culture, Media and Sport (DCSM) within the RDAs will create new regional structures to deliver cultural programmes. In addition, the invitation for local authorities to pilot coordinated local cultural strategies and the planned increases for cultural funding in England over the next three years create a number of resources which can strengthen the cultural relationship between universities and their communities on a local and regional level. However, the broader contributions which universities make to social and cultural development within regions are not likely to be appreciated fully by new regional bodies such as the RDAs. Yet, in general, there is new reality to territorial governance which is increasingly bringing together universities and other regional actors. 
Second, in terms of pull factors, the cultural relationship between the university and the community is being altered by wider processes of social and economic restructuring throughout the West, and shifts in the way in which cultural activity is organised, funded, and consumed. For example, many localities have drawn upon consumptionbased rather than production-based growth models to offset decline in the local economy and have focused upon cultural quarters based around local characteristics and skills. There has also been a renewed interest in city-centre living, spearheaded by a new class of service-sector professionals and other groups with a high propensity to consume culture such as students, artists, and cultural intermediaries who have created a new demand for a range of goods and services (Featherstone, 1991; O'Connor and Wynne, 1998; Zukin, 1995). In sum, a whole range of locally based cultural resources and activities have been generated, which open up opportunities for universities to engage more with their localities. 
However, the university is also set in a context of the commodification and globalisation of cultural activity, the blurring of cultural hierarchies in society, such as those between high and popular cultures, and the loss of the critical function of culture (Featherstone, 1991; Frow, 1995; Harvey, 1989). Further, DiMaggio (1991, page 142) suggests that the institutional infrastructure which maintained the high culture^popular culture hierarchy has been eroded through three trends: the decline of a locally based elite able to uphold the boundaries of high culture; a more varied consumer demand which is linked mainly to the increase in education attainment; and the rise of a broader base of institutional support and management structures for cultural activities. In an era when entertainment is increasingly directed by global corporate culture rather than a national or local elite it is difficult to talk of national and local cultures. Localities, then, have become places for an expanding range of cultural consumption, production, and experimentation drawn from an increasingly mobile set of actors and activities and a range of places. 
Universities are not immune to this spread of global corporate culture, and as a result their role as a patron of national culture and upholder of national identity is being eroded. In this context, Smith and Webster (1997) have discussed the emergence of the postmodern university in which the grand narrative of the university, centred on the production of a unified cultural idea is losing validity. The university's ability to reproduce social and cultural hierarchies and maintain the high-culture system, then, is 
The cultural role of universities in the community 169 
contested (DiMaggio, 1991, page 148). In this sense, ``the mass education system, which, rather than being tied to the reproduction of an elite, now has the more diffuse function of the differential formation of cultural capital'' (Frow, 1995, page 86). 
In this less nationally regulated system, the university finds itself in competition with other, increasingly market-based, generators of cultural authority. In response to such competition, many universities are seeking niches within which to generate new forms of cultural authority, client groups, and funding sources. This can be seen through the emergence of interdisciplinary areas of study such as cultural studies and activities such as multimedia, fashion, design, animation, and digital and sound recording. Such moves represent an attempt from universities to invest in new fields of cultural production whilst retaining a stake in traditional cultural activity (Bourdieu, 1988; 1993). The territorial monopoly of universities is also being eroded by generic carrier technologies such as the Internet, the emergence of the `virtual university', and the globalisation of HE provision. Many universities are responding to this disembedding process by reasserting their distinctiveness as place-based institutions set in particular cultural contexts. 
However, what can be discerned from these factors overall is that they are placing universities under increasing pressure to demonstrate the relevance of their autonomous teaching and research activities to local economic, social, and cultural objectives. This wider territorial dynamic was observed by Bender (1998, page 24): 
``The modern academic disciplines were born in alliance with the rising nation state, not the city ... for its first century the modern university and nation have been more closely tied than the university and the city. Today, however, there is a question of whether the nation is secure enough to host either science or scholarship ... . Might the metropolis supersede the nation as the sustaining milieu for the modern university and its disciplines in its second century?'' 
Some comments on the cultural role of universities In light of these territorial dynamics, in the following sections I will outline in detail some of the prevailing cultural relationship between the university and the community. Although it is clear that universities have a major cultural, as well as teaching and research, role in the community, few attempts have been made to specify these in detail. As Robson et al (1995, page 3) commented: ``the HEI impact is a broad one, covering not only the measurable elements of financial and employment generation, but also the wider cultural and social aspects of local and regional life''. Further, van der Wusten (1998, page 5) observed that: 
``Culturally, universities provide their cities with captive audiences, critical comment and sometimes performers in the world of the arts. To what extent aesthetic doctrines and cultural fashions originate in university milieux is a moot point, but universities certainly play a role in nurturing such orientations and this shows in the cultural life of their surrounding cities.'' However, when the cultural roles of the university are discussed, there are a number of caveats. First, the range of cultural impacts from universities varies greatly and represents different combinations of enduring traditional roles and newer roles. Further, whereas many cultural impacts, such as the number of arts graduates or attendance levels at cultural performances, are measurable, other cultural impacts such as wider processes of cultural innovation and broadening attitudes are difficult to quantify. Finally, the nature of university^community relationships are highly specific to each locality and are determined by factors such as institutional history, faculty and student mix, and physical location. Of particular influence in Britain are 
170 P Chatterton 
the differences between `old', pre-1992 universities and `new', post-1992 universities (former polytechnics). 
The context of the research: Bristol Culturally the context for this research is distinctive. Bristol has a long history as a city dating back to its role as a prosperous merchant-trading port in the 16th century, which distances it from the more recent industrial, and deindustrial, legacy of most other British cities. More recently, the city has prospered because of its favourable location on the M4 motorway and the growth of `sun rise' industries such as aerospace, electronics and telecommunications, and financial services (Boddy et al, 1986). As well as a large stock of high-cultural facilities, most notably the Theatre Royal which is the oldest continuously working theatre in Britain, Bristol has also developed a reputation for popular culture, especially in terms of the distinctive `Bristol sound' pioneered by bands such as Massive Attack and artists such as Tricky, Portishead, and Roni Size. 
In terms of the two universities in the city, each has its distinctive characteristics: the older University of Bristol is located on a historic and leafy campus in the prosperous Clifton area adjacent to the city centre, whereas the newer University of the West of England (UWE) is largely a greenfield and multisited institution. Both universities, but especially the University of Bristol which had the second highest number of 4 and 5 rated (out of a total of five) departments in Britain in the government's last Research Assessment Exercise, have built up strong academic reputations within the British HE system. 
The high quality of life, cultural amenity, quality educational provision, and economic prosperity in Bristol have induced high levels of in-migration into the city. In particular, with the highest number of applicants per place within the British university system, the University of Bristol is the most sought-after location in Britain by university students (Financial Times, 1998) and the concentration of high value-added service activity, especially in financial services, has created a large private-sector professional community in the city. Both these groups, characterised by either large disposable incomes and/or high levels of free time, are responsible for generating a large demand for cultural goods and services and sustaining a broad range of cultural activities. 
The university ^ community high-cultural interface A number of examples can be drawn from Bristol to illuminate the high-cultural role of universities. The University of Bristol, representing the `old' university sector, has a paternalistic and traditional cultural role in the city, and its establishment is heavily associated with wealthy benefactors, most notably the Wills family, who were also responsible for funding a large part of Bristol's prewar high-cultural infrastructure. 
The high-cultural role of the University of Bristol is evident through two areas of the academic curriculum: Music and Drama. The Department of Music is located in the Victoria Rooms, a bequest to the University from the Wills family which, dating from the 19th century, is a listed building and a major music and conference venue in the city. The Department is eager to place itself at the heart of the city's musical community which is promoted through the idea of a `Music Federation' linking the University to other venues in Bristol. Its role as a major provider of high culture is evident through a series of free lunchtime concerts and a commercially run concert series in which performances are undertaken by University-based choirs and orchestras and other professional bodies such as the Bristol Opera Company, Bristol Amateur Operatic Society, and the Brunel Ensemble, many of which rely heavily upon graduates and staff. 
The cultural role of universities in the community 171 
Second, the Department of Drama, and its theatre space the Wickham Theatre, has a unique role in the performing arts community in Bristol compared with other theatres of a similar size by offering experimental productions and presenting performance work within an educational environment. Work is presented by current students and visiting theatre companies. The Department also houses the `Theatre Collection', an internationally recognised research centre and gallery which includes the Women's Theatre Collection, the only archive in the world dedicated to preserving women's contribution to theatre. 
UWE, as a `new' university without a traditional university legacy, still contributes to the high-cultural infrastructure of the city through the Centre for Performing Arts (CPA) which was established to meet the demand for producing and consuming the performing arts at the University owing to its lack of curriculum-based high-cultural activity. Activities at the CPA focus on a number of orchestras, choirs, musical productions, smaller quartets, quintets, and ensembles, a series of free lunchtime concerts, workshops, and a theatre club. Audience research from CPA suggests that campus performances largely attract UWE staff and students with performances in the city having a higher nonuniversity audience. 
Although such activity embeds the two universities in the community's official or high-cultural calendar, it does not necessarily reflect local cultural skills or activities but rather the research and leisure interests of staff and students. However, such activity can act as a conduit through which a range of cultural activities and ideas are channelled into the local community. Further, although such activity generates mainly small audiences from the universities rather than the local community, the research suggested that these audiences also sustained activity at other venues in the city, especially in often marginal or experimental areas such as devised theatre and art-house film. 
The cultural roles of the mass university In parallel to these high-cultural roles, the mass HE system which has emerged in Britain undertakes a wide range of cultural roles compared with its elitist 19th century predecessor. A number of these roles are outlined below. 
The development of the cultural industries Universities often contribute to the development of certain sectors within the local and regional economy. In Bristol the Faculty of Art, Media and Design at UWE provides resources for the cultural sectors of the economy, and in particular the local media and animation sectors. Bristol has particular strengths in these sectors and has developed a role as a regional media capital; it is the location of the region's TV franchises, the Watershed Media Centre, the first of its kind in Britain, and is home to a range of firms specialising in preproduction and postproduction, cable, radio, multimedia, and design. 
The main link between the Faculty of Art, Media and Design at UWE and this media community is the `Media Centre' which operates as an academic and commercial entity, and through MEDIAworks, the Centre's training unit, which is the largest media training resource in the region. MEDIAworks undertakes courses for the local media and broadcasting sector, media training and advice for local SMEs and the European Media Industry, and training for community-based projects in deprived inner-city areas. The Media Centre also houses Channel West, an organisation founded and located at the Faculty which acts as a representative body and information clearing house for the film and television community in Bristol. The Media Centre is also the home of Bristol's student radio station, Fresh FM, which was developed jointly by UWE and the University of Bristol with support from local media operators and nightclubs. 
172 P Chatterton 
The Media Centre's links with Bristol's animation sector are also strong. Bristol has developed an international reputation in animation through firms such as Aardman Animation (creators of Wallace and Gromit), A for Animation, and Bolex Brothers. The Media Centre collaboratively runs the `The Bristol Animation Course' which specifically trains students for Bristol's animation sector. Many small animation companies have been established by graduates from this course and Aardman Animation runs work placements for students. 
UWE, then, functions as a resource for the media and animation sectors in Bristol and the Media Centre is heavily involved in developing the city's media and design infrastructure, especially in terms of training provision. Such links create a virtuous cycle of growth between UWE, the Faculty, the media and cultural sectors, and the graduates from UWE who are retained by the city's media firms. As one course leader commented: ``Doing media courses at UWE will get them a job in the industry, after all that's why they come here''. These high levels of graduate retention is enhanced by Bristol's cultural reputation which in turn expands consumer demand for media goods and services. However, there is also a tension with such a close relationship. As one course leader stressed: 
``It is important to strike a balance between intellectual and more personal creative work at UWE and the vocational training needs of the local media and design industries. The University can best act as a resource for the local creative community by generating ideas rather than skills as this can inject dynamism, growth and long termism into the local cultural industries which are practically still cottage industries in the city.'' The University of Bristol also engages with the local cultural industries. The Department of Music is keen to present itself in a wide musical role, by adopting new musical technologies. This is evident through the Department's commercially run `Composition and Recording Studio' which offers multimedia audio-production for the region's media sector, and specialist courses in musical composition techniques for film and television. Further, the Department of Drama is involved in more innovative and technologically based forms of culture through a Masters course in Film and Television which has specialisms in 16mm film-making and multimedia. This course benefits from the Department's close relations with the Watershed Media Centre, which holds an annual screening of work produced by Drama students. 
As well as maintaining their historic high-cultural role, then, universities are engaging with new, often local, cultural partners and areas of cultural activity. These shifts signify the need to seek new client bases and funding sources, adapt to a changing set of client demands, and maintain the authority and relevance of the university in light of competition from other cultural producers and knowledge creators (Bender, 1998; Gibbons et al, 1994). This role is often exemplified by the `new' universities owing to their more self-conscious and systematic interaction with the local community. 
The art community and community art The Faculty of Art, Media and Design at UWE also engage with the city's art community. In particular, `Fine Art in Context' is a practical fine-art course which addresses questions of site, context, and audience in which students and staff develop an interest in the relationship between their experience as an artist and the city. The activities of many of the students engage them with some of the city's economically poorer communities and such engagement can help to ameliorate the perceived elitist and irrelevant role of the University in Bristol. In particular, students engage with the city through `Public Project Group Work' at local schools and undertake their own 
The cultural role of universities in the community 173 
`Residence-Based Work' in the city. The diversity of residencies cannot be expressed here, but to give a flavour they included site-specific work in derelict housing, the development of websites for people in sheltered accommodation, and art installations in local shops. 
Staff from Fine Art in Context are also highly involved with the city's art community. In particular, they work closely with a community arts charity, schools, day and youth centres, and are involved in the management structures of some of the city's main cultural venues. Students are further involved in the city through the negotiation of art installations in playing fields, parks, and office foyers, the installation of `rogue art' on derelict or marginal sites, employment at some of the city's art galleries, and through art education at local community centres and schools. 
Universities and cultural management Universities are also a resource in the cultural community in their role as commentators and practitioners. The paucity of historical links between academics and cultural managers in Bristol has encouraged a number of staff to increase their involvement in the cultural `management' of the city. Such activity includes official representation on some of the city's cultural management groups, cultural venues, art spaces and arts coordinating and lobby groups, local consultancy work, and advice and commentary with the local media. 
In particular, UWE houses the Local Economic Research Unit (LERU) which has undertaken research into tourism management in the region. There is also a significant amount of high-level staff representation on city and regionwide steering groups and cultural bodies such as Bristol 2000 and The Harbourside Project and a number of historic relationships exist between the Universities and key cultural venues in the city, such as the Cathedral and Bristol's Theatre Royal. Further, staff and students from UWE have been involved in `The Open City Project' which is an on-going collaborative artists initiative with the intention of making art more accessible to the public through temporary art installations in the city. Work has also been undertaken at the two Universities which offers analysis and critique of the culture strategy in the city (Bassett, 1993; 1996; Griffiths, 1995). 
Students' unions and the popular culture infrastructure A growing interface between the university and the community is the students' union which, although it exists mainly to provide welfare services specifically for students, is also often a significant cultural provider in the community and offers a range of cultural events such as theatre, comedy, live music, nightclubs, and late-night drinking to wider audiences. Many students' unions are undergoing restructuring and are being transformed into professional entertainment providers in an effort to increase the level of service provision to students and to maintain a stake in the growing student citycentre entertainment market in light of local competition for this lucrative audience. As the editor of Bristol's cultural guide, `The Venue', commented: 
``Students' unions have reorganised themselves and adapted to changing market conditions and also changing aspirations of what students actually want from a night out. Their tastes are becoming much more sophisticated. You've gotta bear in mind that there has been a shift in recent years in the way entertainments officers are organised. They are paid professional gig promoters and I think the level of competence has increased dramatically in recent years.'' The two students' unions in Bristol are significant institutions within the popular cultural infrastructure of the city, especially in areas such as live music, nightclubbing, and drinking. This is evident in a number of ways. First, the Anson Rooms at the University of Bristol Students' Union (UBSU) is one of the main venues for live music 
174 P Chatterton 
in the city and the southwest region and was ranked as the fifth best university venue in the country for live music (Footman, 1996). The Anson Rooms was recently the joint host of Britain's annual Sound City event in 1995 which is considered to be the national laboratory for popular live music. However, there are major problems with the Anson Rooms. It has a capacity of less than 1000, whereas most bands on their national tours choose venues of around 2500. As a result, other neighbouring cities with larger venues such as Birmingham, Newport, and Cardiff are chosen above Bristol. That many wellknown bands still play at the Anson Rooms on their national tours despite its limited capacity is indicative of the fact that they recognise that Bristol is a city in which there is a large demand for live music; a fact which is reinforced by the presence of 34000 HE students in the city. 
Second, the University of the West of England Students' Union (UWESU) has played a pioneering role within the provision of DJ-based dance events by students' unions. In particular, Sutra, a monthly nightclub with a capacity of 1500, contributes to the city's national and international reputation for dance and music culture. As the UWESU entertainment manager commented: 
``We were one of the first universities to put on dance nights and to get DJs to recognise that university gigs are cool to go to and they've not in holes in the ground. We did an awful lot for the reputation of students' unions and there's loads of university dance events now. Our entertainments department has a reputation of knowing what is going on. We brought in big name DJs by word of mouth and we could get anyone we wanted.'' Some of the biggest names on the international DJ circuit played at Sutra including Paul Oakenfold, Carl Cox, Danny Rampling, and Dave Clarke. During its peak, Sutra at UWESU was one of the central components of the city's dance and club infrastructure. Third, UWESU owns a small city-centre nightclub, The Tube Club, which is an example of the way in which students' unions are recognising the need to invest in citycentre entertainment venues in order to retain a hold on the lucrative drink, dance, and music culture markets amongst the under-30s. The recent »2.5 million nightclub development by the students' union at the University of Coventry is one of the best examples of such investment. 
The two students unions in Bristol, then, offer a complementary entertainment packageöwith UWESU specialising in DJ-based and club-based events, and UBSU specialising in live bands (Footman, 1996)öwhich is enhanced by the close working relationship between the two entertainment managers. As the editor of Venue commented: 
``UWE are real pioneers at putting on real high-quality dance productions and they've got the best DJs, the best sound. The University of Bristol is primarily geared towards high profile live rock gigs. Both do their own different thing but the two complement each other.'' 
The role of the student population There is very little research which examines how the activities of students outside the official university calendar contribute to cultural vitality in cities (Chatterton, 1999; Hollands, 1995). This is remarkable considering the fact that students currently make up large populations in many British cities and have a significant direct cultural impact in their role as consumers of city-centre cultural goods, services, and entertainment. For example, in 1994/95, the 34000 students in Bristol represented 9% of the total population (HESA, 1995) and, collectively, spent over »170 million annually in the city, one quarter of which was expenditure on `entertainment', and »17 million on alcohol and tobacco alone (estimated from Callender and Kempson, 1996). 
The cultural role of universities in the community 175 
However, within this population, a significant lifestyle divide is emerging between traditional (largely white, middleclass to upper-class, nonlocal, British-domiciled adolescents) and nontraditional students (previous minorities and those studying on new modes of attendance) within the British HE sector (Chatterton, 1999). The cultural impacts of the latter are more diffuse than the former owing to their dual roles as student ^ parent or student ^ worker and other financial and time constraints. Further, specific subgroups within the student community, such as overseas, religious or ethnic minority students, participate less in what is perceived as the mainstream student identity and lifestyle pursuits, diluting their impact further. 
In contrast, traditional students retain a direct and vivid cultural role in the community. Such students are heavily concentrated in the `old' universities in Britain's large cities and have a particular identity as adolescents with large disposable incomes and free time which enables them to be significant consumers of city-centre-based goods, services, and entertainment, especially those connected with clothes, drink, drug, and music cultures. Traditional in-migrant students also bring with them external interests and resources into the city which provides a broadening of cultural ideas and attitudes in the city. 
Bristol has a particularly high concentration of traditional students. For example, the University of Bristol has the highest concentration of Eton graduates in the United Kingdom and two fifths of students come from independent schools (Targett, 1998) and 90% of undergraduates were under 21 on entry (HESA, 1995). This large cohort of traditional students displays highly segregated use of the city. Research has shown that most leisure time amongst traditional students is spent within the confines of an entertainment infrastructure comprised of student-only or student-oriented venues in the city centre (Chatterton, 1999). The contribution which traditional students make to cultural vitality, then, is highly concentrated in certain areas of the city and certain areas of activity such as nightclubbing and drinking. 
Students with a course-based interest in the arts and culture, such as Drama, Music, Fine Art, and Media Studies, have a broader cultural impact in the city in their role as arts producers and practitioners. In particular, they create a demand in areas of small-scale and specialist cultural activity such as the performing arts and art-house cinema, where small levels of participation can sustain such activity. Traditional students are also a source of vitality in the small-scale and underground DJ-based party and nightclub scene which are undervalorised as cultural forms in cities (Thornton, 1995). In particular, student parties and performances at pubs and nightclubs are often used as an experimental space for creativity. As the entertainment officer at UWESU commented: 
``You'd be amazed at what the student DJs do. They spend all their money on records and they make records too. There are also some very good student promoters knocking about going to venues. There are so many students doing marketing degrees now that there's a lot of students doing warm up nights or they will go to a wine bar and say, `I'll charge a quid and put some DJs on and promote it as hard as I can'. It's done in a much more professional manner now.'' However, students also have a negative cultural effect in cities in terms of creating temporary and seasonal entertainment and residential ghettos and lowering the quality of private rented accommodation. Further, a worrying feature at many old and redbrick universities in Britain is that, as the cost of HE is passed from the state to the individual in Britain, the more wealthy, and hence mobile, adolescent, middle-class to upper-class students have the ability to migrate to Britain's large urban universities and inhabit segregated spaces which are far removed from the indigenous youth in the inner-city areas of these cities. 
176 P Chatterton 
Integrating the cultural community Overall, staff, students, and graduates of the two universities, totalling well over 50 000 in the city, help to sharpen, define, and integrate the creative community in Bristol through formal links such as training provision, work placements, and seeking employment in the cultural sectors and through informal links such as extracurricular activities, socialising at certain venues, and adding to the level of art practitioners and consumers. There are numerous examples of such activity from the Departments of Drama and Music at the University of Bristol whose graduates are involved in the cultural community as, for instance, music and theatre directors, conductors, art therapists, journalists, arts board representatives, and cultural venue managers. The Departments of Music and Drama also provide an additional focus for the cultural community by holding free public art lectures, exhibitions, and performances. 
Many students also take their creative skills into the community on an informal and individual basis. For example, several students from the `Fashion/Textile Design' course at UWE's Faculty of Art, Media and Design undertake fashion and design work concerned with street and club wear which integrates them, either formally through part-time employment or informally through socialising, in the city's pub, club, and retail sector. Further, many graduates from this course have established small workshops and retail outlets which specialise in small-batch street and club wear and sell to many of the small-scale outlets in the fashionable west-end retail sector of the city. 
One important way in which universities impact upon the cultural life of the city is through the virtuous cycle of demand which is created at certain privileged sites within the cultural infrastructure of the city. More specifically, mixed-use cultural venues (blending arts-based bookshops, gallery spaces, cafes, cinemas, and workshops) act as sites of social centrality for the city's cultural community where the work of the university can be extended into the wider city through extracurricular socialising by staff and students. In the context of Bristol, The Watershed Media Centre acts as a focal point for staff and students involved in media, design, and drama activity at the two Universities and the Arnolfini Centre for Contemporary Art fulfils a similar role for those involved in art. These venues also tailor activity to the needs of certain courses by holding workshops, lectures or by screening certain films and exhibitions by artists. The University populations, and in particular those with a course-related interest in culture, then, have a significant impact in the community in terms of generating an added demand for specific cultural goods, services, and performances at these places. In turn, such activity contributes to an expanding cultural demand in the city which can be accessed by wider audiences. It also sustains activity in other associated areas such as cafes, restaurants, and clothes and record shops. 
In this sense, universities contribute to the growing level of demand from a burgeoning cultural consuming class in British cities. The contribution which the growing student population in Britain makes in terms of increasing city-centre cultural demand cannot be underestimated. As Lash (1989, page 252) commented: 
``There has developed in the past decade or two a mass audience for previously specialised cultural forms. Part of this results from the explosion of the student population, which is now a `morphological' factor in the social field.'' One course leader from UWE highlighted this trend: 
``Staff and students from the Faculty [Art, Media and Design] are engaged with the community on two levels; they are involved in production with design firms and other groups in the city and on a more social level they also actively create the cultural life of the city by demanding culture to consume at certain venues.'' 
The cultural role of universities in the community 177 
Discussion: the evolving university ^ community cultural relationship The cultural roles of universities What this paper has highlighted is that the university sector in Britain is intertwined with the community in a number of different ways which are not restricted to the dissemination of a national and high culture. As well as possessing a range of historic cultural facilities such as theatres, galleries, museums, and concert halls, universities also own and manage newer facilities such as musical rehearsal spaces, students' union facilities, cinemas, pubs, nightclubs, media laboratories, and film and recording studios. Moreover, in contrast to its elitist predecessor, the mass university is likely to generate the largest and most frequent audiences in popular culture such as live-gigs or nightclubbing, especially considering the demand for music, dance, drug, and drinking cultures amongst the large young, middle-class student cohort. Considered together, these various cultural roles are a considerable source of cultural innovation and create spin-offs and further demand in related retail and leisure sectors, especially in areas of youth cultural consumption such as music and clothing. 
In sum, universities have a role to play in the cultural development of the community and the wider region: they are seedbeds for new talent; they are one of the few remaining places where artistic experimentation and integrity is financially viable, especially in an era of local authority art-budget cuts; and their staff and student populations play a crucial role in sustaining the viability of many local cultural events and facilities. ``In short, Universities provide an additional focus for the cultural and professional life of the nation outside of the London/Oxford/Cambridge triangle'' (Goddard et al, 1994, page 49). 
Although it is difficult to draw generalisations from this limited discussion, two simultaneous models of university ^ community relationship, each with their own spatialities, can be tentatively discerned which to a certain extent highlight the differences between the older and newer universities. In the first `traditional' model, the university undertakes a historical role of consecrating cultural orders and practices largely associated with a national cultural elite and a process of national identity building with few activities which reflect local and regional cultural activity. A second `mass' model has recently supplemented the first as the university becomes involved in new types of cultural activity to reflect the changing nature of its staff, students, paymasters, and client base. The spatial focus of this second model is local^regional as well as international^national. Clearly, these two models exist side by side in most universities, and taken together they point to the complex spatialities which characterise the cultural role of the university. 
However, it must be noted that many cultural sectors in provincial cities outside national capitals remain cottage industries. This severely limits the amount of employment generation and partnership-based activity emerging from university interaction with the cultural community compared with other areas of interface such as engineering, biotechnology, and continuing professional development. 
A framework for engagement Many of these cultural roles within the university can be considered as part of the growing `third role' of the university, outside of mainstream teaching and research, which highlights the increasing local embeddedness of universities and their role as responsible local, as well as national and international, actors. However, in spite of the breadth and diversity of relationships between the university and the community highlighted in this paper, there is little evidence of strategic and `joined-up' thinking in terms of managing all the areas of cultural activity between the two universities and the local community. In this sense, the relationship is still characterised by the historically 
178 P Chatterton 
dominant and paternalistic role of the university (Elliott et al, 1996). A framework for engagement needs to move beyond simply regarding the university as a source of knowledge and expertise which can be conferred onto the community. There needs to be a mutual and partnership basis for engagement in which universities are involved in the cocreation, co-ownership, and co-use of research knowledge with the partners who cohabit its learning region (Duke, 1998). 
This paper has highlighted that most universities are either being pushed towards greater local engagement by the changing nature of staff and student populations and the changing administrative and funding regimes of universities or being pulled towards it by the localisation and/or regionalisation of territorial governance and the organisation and funding of cultural activity. These various drivers represent opportunities for universities to engage more fully with the cultural management, vibrancy, and stewardship of their communities. In particular, in light of a reduction in state finances for HE, local actors have a commitment to support facilities within the university which are of direct benefit to them. 
However, a framework for engagement also needs to balance the national and international ambitions of universities. The cultural role of the university, then, is not just to develop local cultural capacities, skills, and infrastructure in the community, although this is important, but to create mechanisms through which the rich variety of resources and activities occuring at many different geographical scales from the global to the local within the university can be accessed and contribute to the formation of a local public sphere. Bender (1998, page 27) comments on the rich potential contained within universities: 
``The pluralized culture of the university resembles the complex life of contemporary immigrant neighbourhoods, where residents live in local urban neighbourhoods and diasporic networks. Teachers and students in a university ... must constantly bring together in fruitful ways ... the local and the translocal .... No other institution has such rich connections at once to a local intellectual, political and social milieu and to a global network of ideas, structures, and powers.'' Yet globalisation is a double-edged sword for the university and the community. It is increasingly apparent that globalisation practices such as managerialism, accountability, entrepreneurialism, and privatisation are being borrowed from business and being mainstreamed into the day-to-day running of universities (Currie and Newson, 1999). Moreover, universities are adopting the technobureaucratic model of the transnational corporation, in which the unifying idea is the nonreferential term of `excellence' rather than the ideological notion of `culture' (Readings, 1996). In this context of neoliberal values of the global marketplace, the critical and analytical functions which universities undertake in the community may be subject to erosionöa university entrenched in the global marketplace and the interests of global corporations has increasingly less to contribute to a sustainable local economy and community and a vibrant local public culture. 
Universities and local public culture Although universities contain different cultural values and types of activities, these differences are not only a source of tension, but also a resource for the community. Taken together, they can contribute to a shared public culture which offers what Bender (1998, page 26) called `dialogue and difference'. Ideally local public culture is forged, defined, and enacted by as many groups and individuals as possible and is dominated by no single actor. If urban and social renewal lies with `creativity in diversity' (Amin and Graham, 1997, page 422), then universities, through their cultural roles, have large 
The cultural role of universities in the community 179 
institutional capacities to contribute to the functioning of a local public culture. In particular, universities: 
``... may provide the best space available in contemporary cities for the enactment of a public culture ... . Metropolitan universities enable the work of the contemporary public sphere; they offer the possibility of creating a dialogue across the difference that largely defines metropolitan life in our time ... the metropolitan university becomes a rare, incomplete, but essential site for democratic debate and deliberation'' (Bender, 1998, page 25). Zukin (1995, pages 259^ 260) stressed the importance of such spaces: 
``Public spaces are the primary site of public culture; they are a window into the city's soul ... public spaces are important because they are places where strangers mingle freely. But they are also important because they continually negotiate the boundaries of human society ... public spaces enable us to conceptualise and represent the city.'' If the various drivers towards the localisation and regionalisation of universities outlined in this paper are consolidated, then new resources for strengthening a local public culture may emerge: 
``By reorienting academic culture from the nation to the metropolis, and from national cultures to the metropolitan cultures in which they are deeply implicated, one might thereby acquire important new resources for the making of a pluralised public culture'' (Bender, 1998, page 27). However, there are a number of current factors at play, especially amongst Britain's older universities, which impede the contributions which universities, through their cultural roles, can make to this local public culture. These include the lingering perceptions of universities as detached and elitist institutions; their dispersed institutional form and lack of `front door'; paucity of resources to engage with the locality; poor marketing of the resources which are open to the local population; and the lack of attention to addressing issues of exclusion, access, and the radical mixing of identities and experiences. Moreover, the adoption of globalisation discourses and practices by universities may be the most significant impediment to the flourishing of `dialogue and difference' and the development of a strong public culture based upon local capacities and identities. 
The boundary between the university and community, then, needs redressing. As Bender (1998, page 22) comments: ``metropolitan academics ought not work so hard at keeping the city at bay: it is a source of energy, of wonderful complex intellectual problems, and of non-academic intellectuals who have much to offer''. In sum: ``the city offers as many lessons for the university as the university does for the city'' (Bender, 1998, page 23). 
In this paper I have shown the manifold and diverse set of cultural relationships which exist between universities and communities. However, more research is needed to create a deeper understanding of the roles which universities should adopt in the community and their role in creating a local public culture. In particular, the university must be prepared to comanage rather than dominate the local public sphere and must be aware of who it excludes as well as includes whilst carrying out its activities. Through this discussion, questions relating to the complex nature of territoriality within universities have also been raised. In light of the interplay between the processes of localisation, regionalisation, and globalisation, and the enduring structures of national identity and policy frameworks, how the various roles of the university in the community will be managed and whether they can contribute to an open and inclusive public culture is still contested terrain. 
180 P Chatterton 
References Amin A, Graham S, 1997, ``The ordinary city'' Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 
22 411 ^ 429 Bassett K, 1993, ``Urban cultural strategies and urban regeneration: a case study and critique'' 
Environment and Planning A 25 1773 ^ 1788 Bassett K, 1996, ``Partnership, business elites and urban politics: new forms of governance in an 
English city?'' Urban Studies 33 539 ^ 555 Bender T (Ed.), 1988 The University and the City: From Medieval Origins to the Present (Oxford 
University Press, Oxford) Bender T, 1998, ``Universities and the city: scholarship, local life and the necessity of worldliness'', in 
The Urban University and its Identity Ed. H van der Wusten (Kluwer, Dordrecht) pp 17 ^ 29 Benneworth P, 1999, ``RDAs update: the future for relations between higher education and RDAs'' 
Regions: The Newsletter of the Regional Studies Association 220 15 ^ 22 Boddy M, Lovering J, Bassett K, 1986 Sunbelt City? (Routledge, London) Bourdieu P, 1988 Homo Academicus (Polity Press, Cambridge) Bourdieu P, 1993 The Field of Cultural Production (Polity Press, Cambridge) Bourdieu P, Passeron J C, 1979 The Inheritors: French Students and Their Relation to Culture 
(University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL) Callender C, Kempson E, 1996 Student Finances: Income, Expenditure and Take-up of Student 
Loans (Policy Studies Institute, London) Chatterton P, 1999, ``University students and city centresöthe formation of exclusive geographies. 
The case of Bristol, UK'' Geoforum 30 117 ^ 133 Currie J, Newson J (Eds), 1999 Universities and Globalization: Critical Perspectives (Sage, London) DfEE, 1998 Universities and Economic Development Higher Education and Employment Division, Department for Education and Employment, Sanctuary Buildings, Great Smith Street, London SW1 3BT DiMaggio P, 1991, ``Social structure, institutions, and cultural goods: the case of the United States'', inSocial Theory for a Changing SocietyEds P Bourdieu, J S Coleman (Westview Press, Oxford) pp 133 ^ 167 Duke C, 1998, ``Lifelong learning: implications for the university of the 21st century'', paper 
presented at the Fourteenth General Conference of IMHE member institutions, Paris; copy available from the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2 rue Andre ̈Pascal, 75775 Paris Cedex 16 Elliott J, Francis H, Humphreys R, Instance D (Eds), 1996 Communities and their Universities: 
The Challenge of Lifelong Learning (Lawrence and Wishart, London) Featherstone M, 1991 Consumer Culture and Postmodernism (Sage, London) Financial Times, 1998, ``Britain's top 100 universities'', 29 April, page 40 Footman T, 1996, ``Going for the gigs'' Guardian Education 15 August, page 8 Frow J, 1995 Cultural Studies and Cultural Value (Clarendon Press, Oxford) Gibbons M, Limoges C, Nowotny H, Scwartzman S, Scott P, Trow M, 1994 The New Production 
of Knowledge: The Dynamics of Science and Research in Contemporary Society (Sage, London) Goddard J B, 1997a, ``The local and regional role of higher education'', Centre for Urban and 
Regional Development Studies, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle upon Tyne Goddard J B, 1997b, ``Managing the university/regional interface'' Higher Education Management 
9(3) 7 ^ 29 Goddard J B, Charles D, Pike A, Potts G, Bradley D, 1994 Universities and Communities Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals of the United Kingdom, 29 Tavistock Square, London WC1H 9EZ Griffiths R, 1995, ``Cultural strategies and new modes of urban intervention'' Cities 12 253 ^ 266 Hall P, 1997, ``The University and the city'' GeoJournal 41 301 ^ 309 Hardy D, 1996, ``Universities, communities and local regeneration: questioning the case'', in 
Communities and their Universities: The Challenge to Lifelong Learning Eds J Elliott, H Francis, R Humphreys, D Istance (Lawrence and Wishart, London) pp 10 ^ 25 Harvey D, 1989 The Condition of Postmodernity (Basil Blackwell, London) HESA, 1995 Students in Higher Education Institutions, 1994/95 Higher Education Statistical 
Agency, 18 Royal Crescent, Cheltenham, GL50 3DA Hollands R G, 1995,``Friday night, Saturday night. Youth cultural identification in the postindustrial 
city'', Department of Social Policy, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle upon Tyne Lash S, 1989 Sociology of Postmodernism (Routledge, London) 
The cultural role of universities in the community 181 
National Committee of Inquiry into Higher Education, 1997 Chapter 12: The Local and Regional 
Role of Higher Education (The Stationery Office, London) O'Connor J, Wynne D, 1998, ``Consumption and the postmodern city'' Urban Studies 35 841 ^ 864 OECD, 1982 The University and the Community: The Problems of Changing Relationships (OECD, 
Paris) Readings B, 1996 The University in Ruins (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA) Robson B, Topham N, Twomey J, Deas I, 1995, ``The economic and social impact of Greater 
Manchester's Universities'', Centre for Urban Policy Studies, University of Manchester Robson B, Drake K, Deas I, 1997 Higher Education and Regions, Report 9 The National Committee 
of Inquiry into Higher Education (The Stationery Office, London) Smith A,Webster F (Eds), 1997 The Postmodern University? Contested Visions of Higher Education 
in Society (Society for Research into Higher Education and Open University Press, Milton Keynes) Targett S, 1998, ``Redbrick universities reflect on their Oxbridge image'' Financial Times 21 January, 
page 13 Thornton S, 1995 Club Cultures: Music, Media and Subcultural Capital (Polity Press, 
Cambridge) Wusten H van der (Ed.), 1998 The Urban University and its Identity (Kluwer, Dordrecht) Younge G, 1997, ``To find where it's at, go West'' The Guardian 20 August, page 3 Zukin S, 1995 The Cultures of Cities (Blackwell, Oxford) 
ß 2000 a Pion publication printed in Great Britain
﻿Syracuse University SURFACE 
Imagining America Scholarship in Action 
9-2008 Culture and Community Development in Higher Education 
Arlene Goldbard 
Follow this and additional works at: https://surface.syr.edu/ia 
Part of the Arts and Humanities Commons 
Recommended Citation Goldbard, Arlene, "Culture and Community Development in Higher Education" (2008). Imagining America. 13. https://surface.syr.edu/ia/13 
This Report is brought to you for free and open access by the Scholarship in Action at SURFACE. It has been accepted for inclusion in Imagining America by an authorized administrator of SURFACE. For more information, please contact surface@syr.edu. 
CulTure COMMUNity CommuniTy CommuniTy CommuniTy IN A COMMUNITY CAll CUltURE CulTure CulTure for CULTURAL develoPmenT develoPmenT develoPmenT DEvElOPMENt exCellenCe 
ANd And And And 
DEVELOPMENT CURRICULUM iN in in in HiGhER higher higher higher IN HIGHER eduCATion eduCATion eduCATion EdUcAtiON 
EDUCATION 
by by by by by Arlene Arlene Arlene Arlene Arlene Goldbard Goldbard Goldbard Goldbard Goldbard September September September September September 2008 2008 2008 2008 2008 The THE THE THE THE CurriCulum CURRICULUM CURRICULUM CURRICULUM CURRICULUM ProjeCT PROJECT PROJECT PROJECT PROJECT rePorT REPORT REPORT REPORT REPORT 
The CurriCulum ProjeCT rePorT CUltURE ANd COMMUNity DEvElOPMENt 
iN HiGhER EdUcAtiON 
by Arlene Goldbard 
Sponsored by Imagining America: Artists and Scholars in Public Life 
2008 
Cover photo  Appalachian Media Institute/Appalshop 2006 During a community interview project, Appalachian Media Institute interns Tommy Anderson and Rachel Chaney follow a field biology team into Lilley Cornett Woods, the largest old-growth forest in eastern Kentucky. 
TAble of ConTenTS 
CurriCulum ProjeCT Core TeAm And AdviSorS 1 eXeCuTive SummArY 2 inTroduCTion: riPeninG 5 
A Note on Sources and Scope 5 SeCTion 1: CommuniTY CulTurAl develoPmenT 7 A DESCRIPTION OF THE FIELD TO ESTABLISH A CONTEXT FOR THE REPORT 
What Is Community Cultural Development? 7 Converging Paths 9 Personal Journeys 11 Why Is CCD Education Important Now? 13 SeCTion 2: CCd eduCATion: AimS And ideAlS 16 HOW PARTICIPANTS THINK CCD EDUCATION SHOULD BE ACCOMPLISHED 
Contested Elements 17 
Arts Training 18 Scholarship 20 Social Justice 20 SeCTion 3: The STATe of CommuniTY CulTurAl develoPmenT in hiGher 
eduCATion 23 HOW PARTICIPANTS PERCEIVE THE CURRENT STATE OF EDUCATION FOR CCD 
Why Higher Education? 23 From Ideal to Actual in Higher Education 24 
Scope Of CCD Education 27 Varieties Of CCD Education 28 Perceptions Of Existing Programs 28 Deepening Community Engagement 30 Resources And Inspirations 31 Outcomes 34 SeCTion 4: An AbundAnCe of WorThY ChAllenGeS 35 HOW PARTICIPANTS PERCEIVE THE ISSUES SHAPING THE GAP BETWEEN IDEAL AND ACTUAL 
University-Community Relationships 36 Respecting Different Forms of Knowledge 38 Breaking Down The Silos 38 Time and Space Restrictions 39 Faculty Qualifications 41 Community Engagement 42 Curriculum Requirements and Imbalances 43 Preparation For Livelihood 44 SeCTion 5: SuSTAinAble eduCATion for CCd 47 PARTICIPANTS’ IDEAS FOR WHAT IS NEEDED NOW 
Nurturing The Field 47 
Critical Discourse: Meetings, Conferences and Publications 48 One-to-one Learning: Mentors and Consultants 49 Fresh Models 50 Advancing Community Engagement 53 Guiding Aims, Values and Principles 54 
Overarching Values 54 Elements of Education and Dialogue 54 The Centrality of Relationship 55 Institutionalizing CCD Education 56 Seizing Opportunity 57 In Conclusion 57 SeCTion 6: bACK mATTer 58 
ACKnoWledGemenTS 58 bACKGround reSeArCh, inTervieWS And SurveYS 58 APPendiX: The CurriCulum ProjeCT GloSSArY 60 APPendiX: A SAmPlinG of CourSeS And ProGrAmS 62 
Programs at Art Schools 62 Programs at Other Higher Educational Institutions 63 Individual Courses 65 Community-Based Programs 71 APPendiX: CAll for eXCellenCe 72 
CurriCulum ProjeCT Core TeAm And AdviSorS 
ludovic blain iii (Advisor), Director, Project Spotlight at the Center for Social Inclusion. His website address is www.ludovicspeaks.com. 
dudley Cocke (Lead Investigator) is a stage director, writer, media producer and the Artistic Director of Roadside Theater, a wing of Kentucky’s Appalshop. His writing can be found online at www.roadside.org. 
jan Cohen-Cruz (Lead Investigator), author and professor, is Director of Imagining America: Artists and Scholars in Public Life (www.imaginingamerica.org), a national consortium of colleges and universities committed to public scholarship in the arts, humanities and design. 
Arlene Goldbard (Lead Investigator) is a writer and consultant whose focus is the intersection of culture, politics and spirituality. Her blog and other writings may be downloaded from www.arlenegoldbard.com. 
jamie haft (Advisor and Administrator) recently graduated from a community cultural development program at New York University’s Tisch School of the Arts. She serves as Program Coordinator at Imagining America: Artists and Scholars in Public Life (www.imaginingamerica.org) in Syracuse, New York. 
Sonia basSheva mañjon, Ph.d. (Advisor) is Vice-President for Diversity and Strategic Partnerships at Wesleyan University (www.wesleyan.edu) in Middletown, Connecticut. 
The Curriculum Project Report   September 2008 
eXeCuTive SummArY 
The Curriculum Project’s originators undertook this study in recognition of a unique moment of opportunity for the community cultural development (CCD) field: for the artists, educators and organizers whose work is to collaborate with other community members to express identity, concerns and aspirations through the arts and communications media, while building the capacity for social action and contributing to social change. 
All signs point toward a ripening field: 
new writing and documentation are attracting new attention; 
universities across the U.S. are creating scores of individual courses, certificates and degree programs; 
unprecedented numbers of students are matriculating in these programs; and 
social-justice activists are collaborating more and more with artists and cultural organizers to bring cultural awareness into their efforts. 
The great news is that many smart, passionate CCD thinkers and practitioners are creating new ventures in higher-education settings, are eager to talk about their aspirations and circumstances, eager to learn from each other and make their own work meet the highest possible standards. From community artists’ perspectives, the concerns are that higher education’s concepts of knowledge creation may drive out community knowledge, weakening practice; that a field that has always been under-resourced may not receive the administrative and material support needed to secure a meaningful place in academia; and that without resources it cannot garner attention and respect for its values, methods and accomplishments so that they can be taught without undue compromise or distortion. This report—focusing on first-person testimonies from educators, community artists and friends of the field gathered through 28 confidential interviews and 231 online survey responses—is intended as a kind of decentralized conversation that can help to advance the field. 
The narrowest view of community cultural development is that it is something meaningful for artists to do—and they can bring their social consciences along when they do it. CCD education creates meaningful job prospects for graduates to put their creative abilities to work for social benefit in the classroom, in social institutions, in community organizations and in businesses. With a wider perspective, there are even bigger benefits to be gained: the skills CCD practitioners prize—keen perception, relationship-building, flexibility, improvisation, creative problem-solving—are more and more the skills needed to survive and prosper in contemporary society, certainly to address social problems and opportunities. As educators grapple with the changing nature of knowledge and work, there has been much discussion of reinventing the university for a globalized world. This conversation often takes place within a market-oriented framework, but the challenges of living together, of advancing the public good and of awakening creativity in the service of civil society are even more immediate and pervasive, and CCD has a wealth of assets to offer in service of that task. 
AimS And ideAlS: The Curriculum Project was premised on the conviction that excellent CCD programs in higher education depend on three key elements, a balance of community engagement, training in artistic craft and scholarship focusing on the field’s history and animating ideas, as well as the economic and policy environments for it. 
Among research participants, agreement on this ideal was strong. Naming essential elements of an ideal CCD education, a majority of survey participants found practical work more primary than scholarly work. They prized community engagement above all, with classroom training in skills related directly to community engagement a close second. Within CCD, arts training was most valued when it included both conventional artistic skills and core CCD techniques for devising art collaboratively. Participants called for scholarship in the service of action, rather than distanced or abstract study of subjects that might not affect practice. With respect 
The Curriculum Project Report 2 September 2008 
to social justice, participants sought a nuanced view incorporating the understanding that the sloganeering and militancy sometimes associated with social-justice activism are not necessarily compatible with a practice that values dialogue, one with a high tolerance for difference and the ability to hold contradiction without forcing a conclusion. 
The CurrenT STATe: Condense Curriculum Project participants’ assessment of the current state of CCD in higher education to a few lines, and here is what they would say: More and more people are trying very hard to make it work, with differential results ranging from extremely promising to dismal; few individuals know enough about the entire field to generalize reliably about it; and while both hopes and cautions are on high alert, it’s too soon to tell where this may lead. 
Greater resources, a larger potential scale, the opportunity to reflect on practice and create new knowledge, the ability to grant credentials and legitimate practice, a range of courses, commitment to critical thinking and intellectual rigor, a livelihood for practitioner-educators—all of these were cited as reasons to situate CCD programs within higher education. Participants also pointed to obstacles and issues that make this integration difficult, and to a widely perceived gap between aspirations and accomplishments. While the moment is characterized by a passionate pursuit of excellence, of those who responded to our survey question about the state of education for the field, the majority ranked it no higher than “fair.” A notable challenge for those undertaking CCD programs in higher education is how to impart in the more structured and formal setting of a university the ideas, practices, skills and sensibilities they themselves learned through on-the-ground experience and self-directed study. Many specifics, including research participants’ assessment of core subjects, key organizations, key texts and exemplary programs, are included in the body of this report. 
An underlying direction in most programs’ development is recognition of the need to deepen the practice of community engagement. When asked what elements make up their current programs, more than four-fifths of educators and students responding to surveys indicated community engagement, the highest percentage for any element; yet more than two-fifths of educators also indicated that current training in community engagement is insufficient. Only slightly more than half of educators and students saw the strength of their own institutions’ community engagement as a positive and more than a third saw it as a negative. Both the aspiration and the need are evident, and people are working hard to close gaps. 
WorThY ChAllenGeS: Research participants understood that they had taken on an ambitious, sometimes daunting task by attempting to introduce new knowledge and new ways of learning into long established and tenaciously guarded institutional cultures. Some of the key challenges they face are: 
art-world snobbery permeating arts departments; 
vexed relationships between universities and surrounding communities; 
uncertainty whether community knowledge can be respected and integrated into academic programs; 
uncertainty whether university norms can yield to CCD’s commitment to pluralism, participation and equity; 
the problem of respecting the organic time of CCD projects within higher education’s time frameworks; 
addressing the tendency to assign faculty without deep CCD experience to teach in new programs; 
fostering reciprocal, meaningful community engagement; 
ensuring that curriculum includes a balance of scholarship, training and community engagement; and 
 
making professionalization serve the field rather than imposing inappropriate standards or restricting access through credentialing. 
reCommendATionS for SuSTAinAble CCd eduCATion: Participants called for increased resources for CCD; for more critical discourse, reflection and dialogue among peers; and for collaborative learning that embodies the primacy of relationship within CCD. Five characteristics were typical of their recommendations for fresh models of CCD higher education: (1) Combining study and practice so that a close cohort of students learns together, applying what is learned 
within the university before moving out into broader community engagement; 
(2) Bridging CCD out of arts departments, developing programs based on the reality that practitioners come 
either from an arts interest or a community organizing interest, converging in CCD; (3) Deep and sustained community work; 
The Curriculum Project Report   September 2008 
(4) Far-ranging and various curriculum components, drawing on the resources of many different specialties 
available within higher education; and (5) Hybrid models, whether collaborations between academic departments or between an academic program 
and one that is community-based. 
Grounded in this research, the report puts forward ten key guidelines summing up the most important values and principles participants offered to inform future development: 
All parties should recognize that this is a period of action research, marked by experimentation in program design, curriculum and approach to every element of CCD education, and should engage in a spirit of true collaboration. 
It is essential that the values shaping CCD practice also inform and influence education in the field. 
Excellence requires a balance of community engagement, training in artistic practice and scholarship focusing on the field’s history and animating ideas, as well as the economic and policy environments for CCD work. 
Vibrant, participatory critical discourse is essential to the success of both higher education and practice in CCD. Higher educational institutions are best-positioned to seek support for a sustained, iterative discourse from within their own walls and from resource providers. 
Community cultural development in higher education should have an explicit goal of supporting and developing the field beyond university walls. 
Higher-education programs should develop peer relationships with community-based educational programs for practitioners. 
Effective CCD education requires meaningful, equitable and collaborative relationships between educational institutions and community partners, and developing these relationships requires self-critical awareness from both parties. 
While “champions” may drive new programs as they come into being, it is critical to move toward strengthening programs, so that they don’t disappear when their founders move on. 
An overarching aim should be to infuse CCD values across institutions and programs, connecting CCD focused programs with a matrix of related departments and programs by building relationships with collaborating departments and programs sharing similar values. 
 
Community cultural development practitioners and educators should collaborate in pursuing emergent opportunities that can benefit both higher education and community-based practitioners. It is evident that no single organization or project has the ability to implement the insights and recommendations derived from this research. It is a large, multifaceted national project, with roles for everyone who cares about educating young people for community cultural development work. The Curriculum Project team invites every reader of this report to seriously consider what steps he or she can take to ensure the harvest of U.S.-based CCD practitioners gains in quality, quantity and impact each year. 
The Curriculum Project Report   September 2008 
inTroduCTion: riPeninG 
This report attempts to capture a phenomenon in formation: the integration of community cultural development studies into higher education in the United States. There is nothing new about artists and organizers using collaborative, participatory, community-grounded approaches to building community and culture; some who have studied this work see centuries of antecedents, and more recent manifestations have been documented for many decades. But the creation of formal academic programs for community artists is a recent development in this country. 
Newness was one factor in The Curriculum Project’s originators’ decision to undertake this research. As Dudley Cocke, Jan Cohen-Cruz and I explained in the working paper we first issued in the spring of 2007, “A Call for Excellence in Community Cultural Development Curriculum in Higher Education” : 
We’ve come together because we recognize a unique moment of opportunity in our field of practice. Four circumstances have converged to produce this opportunity: 
 A critical mass of analytic writing and documentation has accrued, bringing new attention to cultural development theories and practices that have been gathering force over the last four decades; 
 In the past ten years, universities across the U.S. have created dozens of individual courses, certificates and degree programs in community cultural development; 
 Unprecedented numbers of students are matriculating in these programs, creating an unusual opportunity to affect the field by affecting their education; and 
 More and more, social-justice activists are collaborating with artists and cultural workers to bring cultural awareness into their efforts, understanding that culture is an essential foundation for community development and social change. At the same time, artists are increasingly seeking intersectoral partnerships for their work.  Our research revealed a field still ripening into academic presence and legitimacy, replete with hopeful new sprouts as well as uncertainty about what will be harvested and when. The great excitement here is that so many smart, passionate community cultural development thinkers and practitioners are creating new ventures in higher-education settings. As a group, they are eager to talk about their aspirations and circumstances, eager to learn from each other and make their own work meet the highest possible standards. The concerns are that institutional values, prizing higher education’s concept of knowledge creation, may drive out community knowledge, weakening practice; that a field that has always been under-resourced will not receive the administrative and material support needed to secure a meaningful place in academia; and that without resources it cannot garner attention and respect for its values, methods and accomplishments so that these can be taught without undue compromise or distortion. 
Our hope is that our research will be understood as a kind of decentralized conversation among those most involved, that people will find inspiration in their colleagues’ efforts and aspirations, and that this report will contribute to an ongoing critical discourse that will connect all participants even more deeply to their wish to make higher-education programs serve the core values and aims of community cultural development. 
A NOTE ON SOURCES AND SCOPE 
Throughout this report, extended quotations appear as indented and italicized paragraphs. Each new paragraph indicates a new speaker. Those quotations for which no source is cited either in the text or via a footnote are taken from the 28 confidential interviews and 231 online survey responses compiled during the research phase of the project and in a few cases, from transcripts of story circles with educators, students and community artists conducted at the March 2008 Community Arts Convening and Research Project at Maryland Institute College of Art in Baltimore. Interviews and surveys were confidential to encourage interviewees to speak frankly about issues and obstacles to their work, sharing criticisms as well as praise without risk to themselves. A list of interviewees appears in the “Acknowledgments” section of this report. 
1 “A Call for Excellence in Community Cultural Development Curriculum in Higher Education” appears in its entirety as an appendix to this report. 
The Curriculum Project Report   September 2008 
Online surveys were available to five different self-identified groups of respondents: community artists and cultural organization leaders (who completed 124 of the aggregate 231 responses); educators (who completed 46); friends of the field (such as consultants and funders, who completed 31); students and recent graduates (who completed 22); and community-based organization partners of higher education (such as groups receiving placements from university programs, who completed 8). When citing percentages of survey responses, we’ve rounded up or down to the nearest full percentage point. 
Taken together with the confidential interviews, the representation of educators, community artists and other professionals relating to the field includes participation from the vast majority of extant academic programs and from a great many thoughtful and leading voices who share our interest in the field’s well-being. It is difficult to interpret the low level of participation by the last two groups. We were assured by key people in academic programs that they forwarded invitations to take part to their own students and community-based partners. Did so few of them respond on account of lack of interest, lack of time, the pressure of other demands? Does this indicate that students and community-based partners have not been brought fully into the dialogue on CCD education by those in the academy? Is the discourse not sufficiently developed to support participation in this type of research, particularly by students? Do students lack sufficient information to generalize about the field? Without more data, these questions remain open. 
Because of the small sample of students and community-based partners, we have not relied on survey data to draw significant conclusions about these groups, but have included information on their responses and comments wherever appropriate and have also included them in general statements reflecting overall response to similar questions across the multiple surveys. 
Finally, this report does not extend to CCD higher-education programs outside the United States, where (as several interviewees pointed out) one can find older and larger programs that are well worth the attention of their U.S. counterparts, who will discover there useful examples, real inspiration and a body of instructive experience for those starting domestic programs. (A number of these are listed under “Places to Study” on www.communityarts.net, which is recommended as a starting-place for anyone wishing to explore international programs.) 
This report comprises six main sections: 
The first section provides the context for the project, describing the field and offering some key features of its history and development; 
The second sections turns to the ideal, capturing what research participants told us about how they think higher education for community cultural development should be accomplished; 
The third section summarizes what participants shared about the current state of the field, how they perceive the reality as opposed to the ideal; 
The fourth section presents the challenges research participants flagged when asked what contributes to the gap between actual and ideal; 
The fifth section shares participants’ ideas about what is needed to close that gap; and 
 
The final section includes back matter such as a glossary, a sampling of courses and programs and a list of interviewees. 
The Curriculum Project Report   September 2008 
SeCTion 1: CommuniTY CulTurAl develoPmenT 
Community Cultural development describes a range of initiatives undertaken by artists in collaboration with other community members to express identity, concerns and aspirations through the arts and communications media, while building the capacity for social action and contributing to social change. Sometimes abbreviated CCD. The Curriculum Project uses this term because it seems to encompass all the key elements of the practice: community, culture and development (or as in the title of this report, culture and community development). (From the glossary for this report.) One indicator of a field in formation is its nomenclature. Curriculum Project research showed that neither “community cultural development” nor any of the other terms sometimes used for facets of this work (such as “community arts,” “community-based arts,” “community engagement through the arts,” “arts-based community development” and “art and social change”) dominates current usage. 
Some scholars and practitioners prefer more narrowly descriptive labels for their own specialties, such as “teaching artist,” “theatre in education specialist,” “muralist” or “joker” (the term for a facilitator of Forum Theatre as originated by Augusto Boal). In addition to the multiple choices we offered respondents to our online survey—artist, community artist, community cultural development practitioner, teaching artist, community organizer and arts-based community developer—here are some of the dozens of terms people used to describe themselves: 
artist/educator/tool-maker culture worker community-based artist creative arts specialist social artist artist facilitator arts administrator activist or socially engaged artist artist-in-residence cultural organizer 
Or as one respondent put it, “No usual term; perhaps facilitator of community art production and community action. Agh!” 
Many labels are seen as too complicated or unfamiliar to enter into easy usage: whether one says, “I’m a community cultural development practitioner,” “I’m a socially engaged artist” or “I’m an arts-based community developer,” the next part of the conversation will include lengthy explanations. It appears the largest number of practitioners describe themselves simply as “artist,” choosing to carry out the artist’s task in the deeply democratic and socially conscious mode of the community cultural development practitioner. “Artist” is the preferred term of nearly 40 percent of those who responded to this question in our online surveys and of 68 percent of the artists and arts organization representatives. 
Until the nomenclature has ripened into consensus (if it ever does), we will refer to the work by the label that seems most fully descriptive, “community cultural development,” and will most often describe its practitioners as “community artists.” Where “community cultural development” has become the dominant term (for example, in Australia), the conventional shorthand is CCD, far less of a mouthful than the full term; for convenience’s sake, it is used frequently here. 
WHAT IS COMMUNITY CULTURAL DEVELOPMENT? 
There is no archetypal or definitive community cultural development project, no manual that dictates practice. Community artists have used every arts medium and many different approaches to create projects designed for the unique circumstances and assets of a particular group of participants. Some projects turn on the creation of public art works, others use dance or theatre, some employ community gardens, some generate videos or computer-based multimedia: every art form can be an instrument of community cultural development. Similarly, “community” has been defined in geographic terms (such as a small town or an urban neighborhood), in terms of common interest (such as a shared desire to address environmental concerns or have a voice in local economic development efforts) and in terms of many other affinities (single mothers, Latino elders, incarcerated youth). 
To begin to comprehend the range of activity, consider the following brief descriptions of just three chosen at random from thousands of projects. (For anyone interested in exploring a range of recent CCD projects, 
The Curriculum Project Report   September 2008 
an excellent online resource is CAN, the Community Arts Network <www.communityarts.net>. The first two projects below are profiled in greater depth on CAN and may be accessed by searching the site for the project’s name.): 
zAmya Theater Project, based in Minneapolis, is an ongoing collaboration between homeless community members and community artists. They use story circles and other participatory methods to co-create performances designed to pierce the denial and objectification attaching to the idea of homelessness. Meetings, rehearsals and performances are held at shelters and churches; within performances, the barrier between performer and audience gives way to interactive experiences that personalize the work’s message. As Rachel Chaves’ essay on CAN puts it, “zAmya is not about the change that the housed can bring to the homeless, but the transformations that occur across the board when people engage in a personal and creative endeavor with the common goal of raising awareness.” 
The Great Wall of los Angeles is the longest mural in the world, the product of a decades-long (and continuing) collaboration between the Social and Public Art Resource Center (SPARC) and diverse groups of young people who have taken part in the creation of each segment of this “pictorial representation of the history of ethnic peoples of California from prehistoric times to the 1950’s, conceived by SPARC’S artistic director and founder Judith F. Baca. Begun in 1974, the existing segments were completed over five summers, employing over 400 youth and their families from diverse social and economic backgrounds working with artists, oral historians, ethnologists, scholars and hundreds of community members.” (Go to www.sparcmurals.org and search for The Great Wall to read more and view images.) 
 
The empowered fe fes is a Chicago-based group of teenage girls with disabilities who create videos about their own lives and journeys. They’ve been collaborating with Access Living (“a non-residential Center for Independent Living for people with all types of disabilities”) and Beyondmedia Education (the mission of which is to “collaborate with under-served and under-represented women, youth and communities to tell their stories, connect their stories to the world around us and organize for social justice through the creation and distribution of media arts”). Alysha Kostelny, one of the Fe Fes, reported on CAN that as a result of this experience, “I feel much more confident than when I started with Beyondmedia. I am smart. I can do stuff. I can help people more than I think I can.” 
How can projects so different in medium, style and results all be expressions of the same phenomenon? Community cultural development work is characterized less by commonalities of form or style than by informing values. The following description of core values is from my own primer on CCD and related subjects, New Creative Community: The Art of Cultural Development: 
Over time, practitioners of community cultural development have adopted certain key principles to guide their work. There is no universal declaration or manifesto. Rather, each of these seven points has been given a multitude of different expressions in practice. 
 : Active participation in cultural life is an essential goal of community cultural development. 2: Diversity is a social asset, part of the cultural commonwealth, requiring protection and 
nourishment. 
 : All cultures are essentially equal and society should not promote any one as superior to the 
others.  : Culture is an effective crucible for social transformation, one that can be less polarizing and 
create deeper connections than other social-change arenas. 
 : Cultural expression is a means of emancipation, not the primary end in itself; the process is 
as important as the product.  : Culture is a dynamic, protean whole and there is no value in creating artificial boundaries 
within it. 
 : Artists have roles as agents of transformation that are more socially valuable than mainstream 
art world roles—and certainly equal in legitimacy.2 Participation, inclusion, collaboration—whatever terms are used, this is the essential marker for the work which is our focus: projects are conceived, defined, executed and assessed collectively. Different participants may have markedly different skills and strengths to bring to the enterprise, with one person providing knowledge 
2 Arlene Goldbard, New Creative Community: The Art of Cultural Development, New Village Press, 2006, p. 43. 
The Curriculum Project Report 8 September 2008 
of community relationships, another of cultural heritage, another expertise in relevant social issues, another artistic skills and so on. But all are essential stakeholders. 
Artists and community organizers employ a range of vocabularies deriving from practice to describe their criteria for success, but their message is similar. Each project’s ultimate value is something that can only be judged by all, typically by something very like the following standards: 
Practitioners and participants develop a mutually meaningful, reciprocal and collaborative relationship, one that useful and instructive to all; 
Participants enter fully into roles as co-directors of a project, making substantial and uncoerced contributions to shaping all aspects of the work and setting their own aims; 
Participants experience a deepening and broadening of their cultural knowledge, including self-identity, and a greater mastery of the arts media involved, leading to further learning and practice as desired; 
Participants feel satisfied with what they have been able to express and communicate through a project; 
Participants’ self-directed aims for a project have been advanced and they have met their own aims for external impact (e.g., through sharing or distribution of project results); and 
 
Participants demonstrate heightened confidence and a more favorable disposition toward taking part in community cultural life and/or social action in future. 
While there is ample room for variation within the category “community cultural development,” the essential parameters are well-established: CCD projects are collaborative and participatory, egalitarian in style and outlook, self-directed by all participants, oriented as much to process as to product, linking each individual’s development to the development of community. Although not every practitioner defines his or her work in terms of social justice, the underlying goals are intrinsically linked to bringing about pluralism, participation and equity, sometimes characterized as “cultural democracy.” It was put very beautifully decades ago by Francis Jeanson, a French philosopher and advocate of the Algerian struggle for independence from France who took part in important twentieth-century European cultural policy debates. Jeanson defines cultural democracy’s aims as follows: 
...to arrange things in such a way that culture becomes today for everybody what culture was for a small number of privileged people at every stage of history where it succeeded in reinventing for the benefit of the living the legacy inherited from the dead; that is to say, each time it was able to assist in bringing about a deeper sense of reality and closer bonds of communication.  
Preparing to do this work is The Curriculum Project’s subject. 
CONVERGING PATHS 
The history of CCD can be told from many angles. In terms of large-scale social phenomena, CCD can be seen as a response to the rapid, massive and dislocating social change of the twentieth century. Independent nations and distinct, self-aware and self-determining liberation movements have proliferated as a colonial world order has given way to fresh ideas of beauty and meaning, including attempts to preserve and renew ancient legacies for the benefit of future generations. The rapid penetration of mass media and light-speed transmission of information have opened vast new arenas for dialogue across every sort of geographic and cultural boundary, even as they have threatened much that is distinctly local, place-based and grounded in tradition. National borders have less and less relevance and national character a more complex and fluid meaning as record-breaking numbers of immigrants and refugees from the global South move North in search of safety and livelihood, catalyzing new cultural syntheses wherever they go. 
Some commentators attempt to parse these interconnected phenomena into distinct categories: here we see the impact of economic forces, there technological developments, there educational challenges. But from a community cultural development perspective, they add up to the necessity of understanding culture as society’s crucible, a theme former French Cultural Minister Augustin Girard wrote about more than 30 years ago in Cultural Development: Experiences and Policies, his foundational book on cultural development and policy. “Culture concerns everyone,” wrote Girard, “and it is the most essential thing of all, as it is culture that gives us reason for living, and sometimes for dying.” Those who live on the bleeding edge of cultural 
3 From Francis Jeanson’s “On the Notion of ‘Non-public,’” quoted in Cultural Democracy Number 19, February 1982. 
The Curriculum Project Report   September 2008 
change have understood this far more quickly and deeply than many of those whose work is to observe such phenomena, as should be evident by now from headline-grabbing controversies over immigration, language rights, religious freedom and other cultural issues. 
As culture has moved toward center stage within the United States, artists and community organizers have devised many ways to engage community members in exploring their own relationships to culture and community, from the earliest settlement houses founded in the late 19th century to the Popular Front artists’ movements focused on working-class culture in the 1930s; from the unprecedented New Deal cultural programs of the Works Progress Administration (WPA) under President Franklin Delano Roosevelt—preserving slave narratives, turning the day’s headlines into theatre, putting large numbers of artists to work for the public good—to the largely rural arts extension programs of universities, such as the remarkable theatre work done beginning in the mid-forties under Robert Gard at the University of Wisconsin. 
By the 1960s, artists and community organizers were central to a national process of cultural awakening and conflict over the right to a self-determined cultural identity, a domestic process informed by the global awakening from colonialism. Civil rights movement slogans such as “Black is beautiful” grew out of a complex and passionate debate about culture as a medium for both insult and pride. Insurgent cultural practice flourished wherever social upheaval created fertile ground: community murals, street theatre and topical music were regular features of liberationist movements. In the wake of urban riots following the assassinations of Malcolm X and Martin Luther King, community arts activists made use of public funds created to employ youth and stabilize communities, setting up workshops, public art programs, performing troupes and other initiatives designed to engage those who had been disenfranchised in asserting their cultural citizenship, celebrating their heritage and envisioning a positive future for their communities. By the early 1970s, when public service employment was widely seen as a partial solution to social unrest and economic pressure, thousands of jobs were made available to community artists and organizers across the country through the Nixon and Ford administrations’ investment in the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA). 
Many of the senior faculty members involved in CCD education today were first supported by CETA jobs, modest grants from the “Expansion Arts” division of the National Endowment for the Arts and other taxpayer-funded investments in community cultural development. The advent of the Reagan administration in 1980 heralded the decline of U.S. federal support for CCD, creating a generational divide. Many young CCD practitioners today have never received public funding. Those whose work does not attain the scale necessary to attract support from the few major foundations active in the field typically cobble together a range of support sources, from “day jobs” and credit cards to small grants from local public and private funders to income earned through sales and fees. 
Under current conditions, therefore, the field encompasses remarkable variety, from long-lived organizations supported through major grants from national and regional public and private funders to community centers emerging from civil rights movements, strongly rooted in their own communities, to a range of hybrid projects where artists produce conventional offerings (such as concerts or exhibits) side-by-side with collaborative, community-based work, or where groups with primary identifications in education, health or community development (rather than the arts) use CCD approaches to further their work. There are always niches for individual practitioners without organizational affiliation: some who define themselves as part of the growing category of “teaching artists” employ CCD methods in their classroom work; others pursue project-based contracts with social agencies and nonprofit organizations; still other community artists earn their livelihood by applying CCD techniques (if not the insurgent intentions that generated those techniques) to commercial work, designing retreats, training courses and planning initiatives intended to enliven organizations and businesses. 
Over the last few decades, the avant-garde art world has adopted some community cultural development practices. Avant-garde artists with art-world bona fides may incorporate testimonies and images from community members into works that refer to local social conditions. This migration has blurred categories within higher education, sometimes casting as teachers of CCD politically progressive studio artists with little or no experience with grassroots work, whereas CCD is premised on a very different relationship of art to community. In some of the newer courses adopted by higher educational institutions, the relationship to community cultural development is therefore sketchy: when a syllabus focuses on public art installations commissioned through the usual top-down processes, for instance, and the assigned readings are all from art 
The Curriculum Project Report  0 September 2008 
critics and avant-garde theorists, the convergence of subject matter—the fact that a work of art incorporates critical or democratic messages—is not sufficient to categorize it as CCD. 
Instead of a sharply defined field, what we now see is a continuum of practice, with individual practitioners and scholars deciding where to draw the line. At one end are those whose methods are shaped by CCD’s core values of pluralism, participation and equity. Their work is grounded in relationship between artist-organizers and the other community members with whom they collaborate. They employ a process of action research in which all stakeholders collectively determine what they wish to do together and why, in which all take part in reflecting on and assessing what has been learned as preparation for each successive stage of action. At the other end of the spectrum are artists who want their own work to reflect and connect to a greater social reality, to resonate with others affected by the same social forces, and who as part of their personal creative process gather stories, images or artifacts from others, incorporating them into a finished product. For example, at one end of the range might be a group of artist-organizers assisting people affected by Hurricane Katrina to tell their own stories through a collectively-created work of theatre, with all participants aware that the whole process of learning, interaction, expression and reflection constitutes the work, that the process is not just a way of achieving a finished product. At the other end might be an artist moved by the plight of those displaced by Katrina who crafts a play informed by the stories people share, then submits it to theatres and competitions in the hope of seeing it produced, with no expectation that those who shared stories will have a continuing stake in the way their stories are used. 
I believe it is safe to say that the vast majority of CCD practitioners are happy to have people making art that speaks to social justice and cultural development, whether or not they employ deeply collaborative methods in doing so. There is a big-tent spirit abroad in the field, a gratitude that so many people want arts work to matter as more than a commodity or a road to glory. But welcoming fellow-travelers doesn’t necessitate remapping the journey. Just as there is concern about CCD courses being taught by faculty lacking on-the ground experience with the practices they are to impart, there is concern about the degree to which techniques are taught without reference to the social-justice roots of community cultural development practice, to the deepest reasons to deploy those techniques. 
In the context of this report, the essence of our subject is the study in higher educational settings of what might be called “strong” community cultural development, with core values and methods intact. We have eschewed a too-diffuse definition in which any connection to CCD, no matter how tenuous, is good enough for students. 
PERSONAL JOURNEYS 
Just as social movements and conditions have interacted to produce the current CCD field, from an individual perspective, choosing a life of CCD practice has involved two converging paths. The larger group of practitioners comprises individual artists inspired to pursue CCD’s greater scope, social relevance and potential impact rather than the more isolated and often materially competitive path of the conventional artist. Almost always, they awaken in childhood to their own artistic gifts and desires, then experience a second awakening when they discover CCD and its core values. In our own project team, for instance, with one set of professional intentions in mind, Jamie Haft enrolled in a prestigious degree program for actors; soon she was thrilled to discover community cultural development practice as an antidote to her formal education’s disconnection from questions of social justice. Decades earlier, Jan Cohen-Cruz, embarking on a career in theatre, was drawn into a project making plays with prisoners, changing the course of her own professional life. The other path begins in organizing, in a passion for social justice. Intersecting with CCD practice ignites the dawning realization that lasting change is cultural change, that the values and techniques of community cultural development can engage people more deeply than many of the conventional means of protest or organizing for social change. Curriculum Project team member Dudley Cocke was passionate about civil rights and antiwar activism from his teens, but didn’t get involved in arts work until his thirties, when he was drawn by a friend into helping to write the first local history-based play created by the group that became Roadside Theater, and from there, into helping to create the organizational infrastructure that would enable the play’s production. 
The Curriculum Project Report    September 2008 
Many of the stories provided by interviewees and survey respondents when asked “How and why did you get involved in this work?” are truly remarkable: inspiring, charming, revealing. It would take a book to reprint them all, but here is a small selection from survey respondents that suggests a typical range of paths into the work: 
I came to [this company] in 200  as an apprentice, eager to merge my dance and theatre backgrounds at this physical theatre company and to learn how to teach that to students of all ages and backgrounds. When I got here, I discovered this incredible, new-to-me branch of theatre called community-based theatre, which I have grown to love and value as a creative outlet for me in conversation and collaboration with others (rather than just me talking to an audience). 
I got involved in this work as a spiritual act, as an act of self-fulfillment, as a way of making a “broken person” useful in this world, as a way of advancing my community; I got involved out of a deep love for theatre, for the actor and for justice. 
Working with social justice groups in the southeastern U.S., I had the recurring experience that activist and organizing groups seldom practiced within their institutions the egalitarian and democratic values they preached to the world. After all my attempts to explain it away failed, I came to realize that most community-based groups bring into their work all the dysfunctions of the dominant culture. Several years later, I was introduced to the work of Augusto Boal through several Theatre of the Oppressed (TO) workshops. TO games are very subtle and powerful tools to help people explore their reality in a playful and non-threatening way. They fit very well into popular education programs, both as tools to help in group analysis and reflection, and as tools to rehearse actions. The brilliance of the games, in my experience, is that these complex activities happen by getting people to “tell” stories—primarily with their bodies—instead of through more traditional methods that, intentionally or not, recreate oppressive power relationships among participants. 
Experience in the Peace Corps in two countries in Africa gave a me a start at understanding the integrated role the arts can have in a community and provided a different model for community participation. I began developing programs to teach world music and related art forms inspired by this African model, adapted for the settings I worked in (schools, youth detention, community centers). I got involved in this because I saw a huge gap in the rhetoric of the U.S. as a “first world” country and the realities of homelessness, violence and other social indicators of lack of community, and thought that some useful models for building (and maintaining) community were being ignored, either because of ignorance or ethnocentrism/cultural superiority complex. 
I’ve been a professional actor, director, writer, designer and theatre consultant for more than  0 years. I found my way to this work because in it I found a kind of power and beauty I’d not often seen or felt in more standard theatre fare, no matter how avant-garde. 
I was frustrated in the life of a theatre artist and began working with arts organizations as a teaching artist on the side. I found it so rewarding, I give it more and more of my time and focus. I moved into program design, leadership, consulting and taking on every different kind of expression I could for connecting “the arts” and “people.” I have been very frustrated with the way arts organizations relate to, listen to, respond to and dismiss the public. My work has been to close the conceptual and practical gaps, and I have spent many years training artists who see their communities and artistic responsibilities in broader ways. Here again, there is a continuum of self-definition and practice: at one end, skilled and trained artists who have learned—even helped to invent—community cultural development work, bringing high aesthetic and social-justice standards to their work; and at the other end, able and committed activists who have learned CCD approaches, but for whom the process takes overwhelming precedence over any artistic product, and who measure success by participation and impact much more than aesthetic achievement. Although work at many points on this spectrum can be valid, powerful and filled with meaning, the best has always integrated all these elements, seeing no conflict in embracing the goal of excellence in all dimensions. In this study, our focus is on this integral approach, one that prizes equally artistic skill, organizing skill, study and reflection as the encompassing ideal to which higher education-based programs should aspire. 
The Curriculum Project Report  2 September 2008 
It is impossible to say precisely when higher education and CCD began to interact in the United States, because the first initiatives were driven by individual desires, passionate advocates who created opportunities wherever they could, without much institutional backing. Some of the oldest community cultural development programs, such as the San Francisco Neighborhood Arts Program that flourished most strongly during the 1970s, were begun by academics. (SFNAP was first conceived in the mid-1960s by Art Bierman, a community activist and philosophy professor at San Francisco State College.) Other programs were sparked by the interests of individual faculty members (such as the Prison Creative Arts Program, founded in 1990 by Buzz Alexander, an English professor at the University of Michigan). And still others started with stellar CCD practitioners being invited to bring their skills and wisdom to faculty positions (as with public artist Judy Baca’s joint appointment in Chicano Studies and World Arts and Cultures at UCLA). In recent years, enough of these idiosyncratic appointments and initiatives have emerged to begin qualifying as a trend. That trend has begun to take shape with the advent of new degree programs at institutions like the California College of Arts (a B.F.A. in Community Arts originated by Curriculum Project advisor Sonia BasSheva Mañjon) and the newest program we’re aware of, the City University of New York’s M.A. in Applied Theatre, originated by Chris Vine. 
Thus the emergent phenomenon of CCD in higher education is not so much a movement as the aggregation of individual stories, only recently connecting. Our wish and intention is that this report helps to extend and strengthen those connections for the benefit of all, helping to engender a vibrant critical discourse. 
WHY IS CCD EDUCATION IMPORTANT NOW? 
The narrowest view of community cultural development is that it is something meaningful for artists to do— and they can bring their social consciences along when they do it. Leaders of arts schools and departments have for years faced the disheartening reality that they are preparing students for work most of them will never obtain: few drama graduates wind up in professional regional theatres or on Broadway, few visual arts graduates have successful gallery careers, few film graduates make it in Hollywood. A more common career trajectory for graduates of conventional arts programs entails waiting tables while waiting hopefully for a break. So from this narrow perspective, CCD education creates meaningful job prospects for graduates to put their creative abilities to work for social benefit in the classroom, in hospitals, prisons and other social institutions, in community organizations and in businesses, and that adds real value to an arts degree. 
But in truth, there are much bigger benefits to be gained. Many observers have pointed out that the skills CCD practitioners prize—keen perception, relationship-building, flexibility, improvisation, creative problem solving—are more and more the skills needed to survive and prosper in contemporary society, and certainly to address social problems and opportunities. This is from a 2007 New York Times Magazine piece on university education:In recent decades, the biggest rewards have gone to those whose intelligence is deployable in new directions on short notice, not to those who are locked into a single marketable skill, however thoroughly learned and accredited. Most of the employees who built up, say, Google in its early stages could never have been trained to do so, because neither the company nor the idea of it existed when they were getting their educations. Under such circumstances, it’s best not to specialize too much.  Both of the next two speakers are based in higher education: 
No longer can the university just proclaim that by its pure knowledge it serves the universal interest in society. It has to deliver the goods. Most of those goods are commercial goods, there’s no doubt about it. But also, if you will, it’s a set of civic goods. People concerned about these matters within the university have to be in alliance with people outside the university who are now finding reasons to come back in. 
We’re in a period when it’s just so important that universities redefine the civic compact about what we do as institutions, whether it’s innovation, whether it’s preparation for citizenship, or whether it’s education. What we do as institutions is at the heart of the future of this country and of all the specific communities that are constituents of it. My sense is that being tuned to the world and having permeable boundaries with the world is so much a part of what has to happen 4 Christopher Caldwell, “The Way We Live Now: 2-25-07: What a College Education Buys, ” New York Times Magazine, February 25, 2007 
The Curriculum Project Report    September 2008 
for universities to have credibility in a knowledge economy. Here we are sitting in an economy in a world that is so dependent on sharing knowledge generously and finding ways to cross boundaries—whether those boundaries are intercultural, of race and ethnicity, or geographical. For me, whether you’re doing “basic work” in the sciences like thinking about disease, or whether you’re working in the creative arts and thinking about cultural expression, community empowerment and social justice, there is an important connection to the larger world, and it’s incumbent upon each of us to make that connection. This emerging reinvention of education’s task has manifested in many ways. Here’s one higher-education interviewee talking about the remarkable number of medical students who’ve taken part in community cultural development projects at a particular university: 
A large number of medical school students come over to our department because they are so regimented in the sciences, they’re trying to find courses that are engaging and actually help them to deal with the other side of the brain, the other issues that they want to learn more about. We write recommendations for them, because a lot of the medical schools want to know what else you know aside from science. How much can you contribute to society? If it’s just medicine, then we can get a lot of that. Tell me what else you can do, you know? And how are you a citizen of this world? We can help advise them on what kinds of experiences they should be having in order to answer that question. It’s not just volunteering, not just doing community work, but actually engaging in community work, developing relationships with people, not just giving out Thanksgiving turkeys. Here another interviewee describes how CCD practice is intrinsically educational and enlarging, qualities that are assets within and beyond higher education: 
To me, what’s most exciting about this work, whether it occurs in schools or in community settings, is that the artists invite people to cross boundaries and they legitimate it. They give people permission to do things that they normally don’t do. Learning is all about boundary crossing, it’s moving from your safe and familiar comfort zone into another. Learning is about stretching, growing is about stretching. And whether you’re doing work that you think of as community cultural development or arts integration in a public school classroom, that’s what you’re helping people do. One challenge to the integration of CCD into higher education is the difficulty educators encounter in obtaining institutional validation for community-engaged work, as opposed to the conventional path to tenure and promotion via academic publishing and related activities. In Scholarship in Public: Knowledge Creation and Tenure Policy in the Engaged University, Imagining America’s recent report on promotion and tenure, the problem is clearly described and solutions are offered: 
Publicly engaged academic work is taking hold in American colleges and universities, part of a larger trend toward civil professionalism in many spheres. But tenure and promotion policies lag behind public scholarly and creative work and discourage faculty from doing it.... 
[E]nlarging the conception of who counts as “peer” and what counts as “publication” is part of something bigger: the democratization of knowledge on and off campus.  
Speaking with students and practitioners, one striking point of commonality is how meaningful they find CCD work, how they experience a wealth of higher meaning in the practice. This speaker is a student: 
[A particular] project really fueled my sense of spirituality in that way of community, facing in the same direction, common goals, common purpose and the sort of support and kind of relationship that I had as a child in church, feeling that safe place and a sense of belonging and also power in numbers. It was around those years that I felt like my theatre art became more like a practice; I thought of it like a martial arts practice, more than a spiritual practice, though martial arts is very spiritual. More than anywhere else in my life I experience a sense of spirit when I work with someone who maybe doesn’t think they have a story to tell and has a transformative journey in which they surprise themselves, and they do have something that no one in their life told them 
5 Julie Ellison and Timothy K. Eastman, Scholarship in Public: Knowledge Creation and Tenure Policy in the Engaged University: A Resource on Promotion and Tenure in the Arts, Humanities, and Design, Imagining America, 2008, p.iv. Download from <www.imaginingamerica.org/TTI/TTI.html>. 
The Curriculum Project Report    September 2008 
they should be able to do, but there they are on stage, and they’re doing it. Being a part of that for me is really transformative, is a reciprocal kind of opening up. For me, that’s where my spirit lives, when I get a sense of being a spiritual being. As educators grapple with the changing nature of knowledge and work, there has been much discussion of redefining the university for the challenges of a globalized world. This conversation often takes place within a market-oriented framework. But the challenges of living together, of advancing the public good and of awakening creativity in the service of civil society are even more immediate and pervasive, as these educators and activists describe: 
The  9th century university, the German-style university, that [many] American universities are based on, is premised on a certain Eurocentric division of knowledge and labor. That, as all paradigms, has its limits. In this globalized world, this kind of hyper-specialization has its severe limits. The new paradigm is cross-cultural, is interdisciplinary without necessarily giving up benefits of certain kinds of specialization. It’s decolonized, because racism and colonial mentalities have really hit the limit, have really limited the ability of all people who subscribe to those approaches to actually gain a more accurate understanding, a more resonant understanding of how things work. This gets back to the epistemic insight that people who are not deeply imbedded in these systems and have subaltern relationships of various kinds to the way the dominant structure operates have these insights, they know these things. They have different reasons why they know these things. A lot of them are academics and intellectuals who know those things. It’s very simple to change that by opening the doors to this new kind of knowledge that has a deeper insight about how things actually work. 
We’re number one with our incarceration rates, right? I heard that the other day and it chilled me. We see the disparity of wealth and people getting poorer and people getting displaced and communities getting destroyed. Many artists are saying they can’t afford to live in East Harlem anymore. Can’t. It seems to me that the university has to decide what is the consciousness of a nation, that’s the product you’re giving out into the world. The university is supposed to have some sense of contributing to that consciousness, that quality of a nation. I think we as citizens of this nation are realizing how wanting of value, of consciousness, of caring for our community, caring for people, our nation has become. We’ve lost it. And people are losing their homes left and right. People who work every day can’t pay insurance, can’t pay their medical bill, and can’t have a quality of life in the richest nation in the world—what are we talking about? What are we doing and what are we producing? And that’s frightening. That’s really frightening. Universities have a responsibility to put people out in the world with a sense of consciousness, a sense of the quality of life that everyone should be part of. 
We hope that readers of this report will forgo the narrowest view of CCD in favor of this exciting prospect: that in integrating community cultural development studies into institutions of higher education now, new vistas of possibility will be opened for higher education premised on the values of pluralism, participation and equity, with universities and communities as valued and reciprocating partners in cultural development. 
The Curriculum Project Report    September 2008 
SeCTion 2: CCd eduCATion: AimS And ideAlS 
In the “Call for Excellence” that heralded this project (the full text appears as an appendix to this report), we stated that excellent CCD programs in higher education depend on three key elements: 
Excellence requires a balance of community engagement, training in both aesthetics and community organizing, and scholarship focusing on the field’s history and animating ideas, as well as the economic and policy environments for it. 
Our assertion was based on the understanding that community cultural development is an integral practice, engaging the full person. From decades of observation and practice, we’ve seen that skill, sensitivity, knowledge and an embrace of critical reflection are all required to bring the work to its highest level; and like many professions considered both as art and craft (such as medicine), effective preparation must be shaped by the very same values, understandings and experiences that inform good practice. 
This interviewee, who has worked in both community and higher-education settings, makes the same points in very different language: 
The teaching artist—cultural worker, whatever we want to call them—has to understand how to do the research to understand the community that they’re working with, what the issues are in that community. For the art to be meaningful and purposeful, I would say that’s the number one issue. And often that’s not what you’re taught in technique class.... Then of course, the teaching artist has to come with a history of understanding the art form they’re dealing with. So they have to be well-trained in their own art form, and have to be practicing it in some way. Then comes the third criterion, which is how are they trained as a facilitator? Ultimately for it to be a community-based arts piece representing a community, if we are empowering the participants to share their views and share their way of working, that’s another criterion. I think these criteria are very distinctive to community cultural work as opposed to going into what I would call the canon, the traditional ways people learn art. There are a gazillion art classes out there. There are very few that really address how the arts have empowered community. Although our research revealed remarkable variety in almost every element of existing CCD higher education programs—from course offerings to scholarly resources to teaching styles and modes of practice— among research participants, agreement on this ideal was strong. In our surveys overall, 49% of those responding felt that all three elements—community engagement, training and scholarship—should receive equal weight in a properly balanced CCD education. The figures were highest for those currently outside higher educational environments: 62% of friends of the field and 51% of community artists and organizational leaders indicated equal weight was best. When one element was deemed primary, 35% of community artists and 29% of friends of the field chose community engagement. 
Students, on the other hand, stressed training in craft, a choice made by 56% of our small sample of student respondents. In undergraduate studies, it appears that students’ desire to learn their own art forms is as strong as their wish to learn CCD practice. This educator explains how craft training emerged into priority in one program of higher education for community cultural development: 
Students wanted the opportunity to do more art-making that wasn’t connected to collaboration, that wasn’t connected to a project in community. I changed and moved around some of the units to give students the opportunity to do more studio classes. They say they’re making and they’re in the process of making, combined with what they’ve learned from a historical and 
The Curriculum Project Report  6 September 2008 
theoretical perspective, it gives them an opportunity to really clearly identify how they want to work as a community artist. That was very, very helpful, because most of their studio classes were community collaboration studio classes and not a lot of individual—just a sculpture class, or just a painting class. So we’ve tweaked the curriculum to give them the opportunity to focus on their own art-making. But also coming out of that, what does that mean? What does that mean as you go through this process of individual art-making in terms of the work that you want to do in the world? Consider the following sampling of comments from survey participants. 
From friends of the field: 
In the ideal they are equal, but engagement must be primary and constant, simply because the community is never stagnant and is always in flux. 
I’m not aware of anywhere where they are truly equal; this seems essential. Nobody with a degree, certificate or proof of training in community arts can pretend to operate effectively in the field without all three. 
I feel that they all are equally important because each element works hand in hand. You may have a very engaged community worker but if they are not skilled in their discipline, how high is the level that they can engage the community? The artist needs to be able to constantly meet the challenges of what the community asks for and needs. from community artists and organizational leaders: 
It’s having a good understanding of all three elements and then learning how to balance them that provides the right foundation for community cultural development. 
In an ideal world all are equal. But a passion for the arts—a passion for social justice and a thirst to learn—these are most important. 
All three are essential for creating a healthy creative environment. Without community engagement the work is not relevant, without scholarship or education to audience and artist the work will not be comprehensive, without training in craft the work will be juvenile. 
You can be a successful scholar or artist, but unable to engage a community in a project. So I believe that community engagement should be at the center of the curriculum. You still need scholarship and training in your craft, but these skills are useless if you can’t effectively connect and motivate people to participate and commit to a project. Facilitation and communication are crucial skills to learn and hone. 
from students: 
We not only have a duty to facilitate the art of an artist but their preparation in entering the field. Art should be integral, though I would rate everything else equally on the second tier. 
While I think scholarship is important, I personally am less interested in being really great at writing about the work than I am making really good work and engaging really well with my partners. If you are grounded in your craft and have the tools for engaging with others, then I’m not sold on the merits of scholarship as being a primary focus. I would rather make the work and talk with folks about it—than write essays about it. 
CONTESTED ELEMENTS 
When asked to indicate essential elements of an ideal CCD education, a majority of survey participants found practical work more primary than scholarly work. Most survey participants prized community engagement above all, with classroom training in skills related directly to community engagement a close second. 
Three of the elements listed in our survey were most strongly contested: arts training, scholarship and social-justice related courses, all discussed below. 
The Curriculum Project Report  7 September 2008 
elements of ideal CCd education: Essential 
priority 
Important but optional 
Non-essential Don’t know 
Non-essential Don’t know 
Hands-on community engagement projects 
91% 6% 2% 1% 
Classroom training in group work, facilitation and other community engagement practices 
80% 16% 2% 1% 
Technique classes and studio work in arts practices 
66% 25% 6% 2% 
Classes and seminars in social change and social-justice topics 
49% 37% 10% 2% 
Classes and seminars in cultural policy, relevant arts history, theory and criticism of the field 
48% 37% 8% 2% 
What does this mean? Not that there is no value for CCD practitioners in classroom or studio work: indeed, only a tiny minority of respondents to each survey found any of the three categories non-essential. Above all, the valorizing of hands-on community engagement means that there is no substitute for placing one’s body, mind and spirit in the crucible of community work. No learning experience yields its full meaning until it has been tested in this way. No form of knowledge is valid that does not withstand the challenges that hands-on work presents, as expressed by this educator: 
Experiential learning is the approach that seems to be more successful when we talk about how to get information across to students. How do we get them to actually think and to learn and how to make decisions based on that? I’m getting to the point where learning just the facts, it’s just not good enough. I get really concerned when a student gets the facts but does not know how to do things. We need to have students go out and actually figure out what are the problems and also be able to work with those individuals who are also struggling with those problems, and understand that there’s not just one solution. How do you think on your feet, you know? How do you figure out what’s the next step and work with people and understand that failure is not a bad thing? There’s a stepping-off point that the students need to have: these are some of the things you may experience and these are the theories behind it, so once they get out there or once they come back from it, they get in touch with other people’s experiences through the literature and the theory. I think you need both. You can’t just do hands-on, but you also need to understand the context of that. I would never send students out there in the community without understanding the community first. How do you say hello in that community? Who are those people and how do they differ from you and how are they similar to you? What’s the jumping-off point? Come in with something to offer and come in ready to listen. 
ARTS TRAINING 
Each of the three contested elements was subject to interpretation by participants, of course, and each was seen in slightly different ways by different individuals. For instance, how central is training in artistic skills to the best preparation for CCD practice? There was considerable variation among interviewees on that question. Consider the range of views in this selection from interviewees: 
Students need a grounding in the conventional aesthetic skills. And I think they need to know how to function, they need to know what those art languages are. And there are good things about those art languages. Then there’s also the aesthetic craft of community-based work which is its own set of skills that have to do with listening, observing, facilitating, digital applications, where more experimental and conceptual work, more abstract work comes into play, the kind of interdisciplinary installation performance skills that tend to build upon more conventional craft skill-sets. So you have someone who’s a sculptor and that’s what they’re taking their studio classes in and that’s good, and they need to master that. That’s one kind of practitioner who’s 
The Curriculum Project Report  8 September 2008 
mastered those skills, there’s nothing wrong with those skills. But then they have to extend those skills, and that’s where the community-based artist is born. They take those things and can think conceptually or think interdisciplinarily. 
I’m very torn about teaching artistic techniques. I often think that they would develop those skills as they work in communities, learning from masters who are already out there. But then I’m saying, ”Well gee, what would they have to offer if you just send them out there like that?” So, they have to have some basic skill level in terms of studio, some sense of at least what is the language that you’re trying to communicate through, before they’re sent out there. And then that development can come through the need for something to say and in finding that something to say. But I think we do them a disservice if we just send them out without having a foundation. 
We are training artists. This is an art college, we’re training practitioners and so we’re training practitioners that also understand teaching philosophies, they also understand community activism, political activism, they understand social justice, they understand diversity. So I like to think that we’re training practitioners that come with a cause. They’re thinkers—not that other artists aren’t thinkers—but I mean they’re thinkers in terms of yes, I’m a really good ceramicist and then what is the commentary of the work that I’m making in terms of dealing with the issues that I feel are important in the community? So it’s taking it that one step further: yes, we want to develop really good practitioners, but we want to create good practitioners with a consciousness and a responsibility. 
When you talk about artistic excellence, the question for me always goes to what is the intended purpose of the work? How well does this work meet that goal? Outside of that, everything else is me saying, “Well I don’t like that because of this, that and the other” or “I loved it because of that.” That is the most important part of really looking at training.... A lot of people have talent. I know people that can dance but they’ve never been to school for it. People that can act, people that can tell jokes, that have never been trained, but are some of the best actors and comedians that I have ever met. So, does their value diminish because they’ve never been formally trained? In the community, no. But then, this commercial capitalist world that we live in, yes, if you don’t go through the proper channels you’re not going to get the validation and respect that you need in order to be able to make a living from your talent. And so, my theory is that all these people will be coming from these institutions that will be getting the validation but may not necessarily know how to do the work, and not really be grounded in the community and really understand what all this stuff means. 
Interviewees stressed aspects of CCD values and practice that must be brought to the broad category of training in arts skills. For instance, these explanations of what artistic training means in a CCD context are from two practitioners who also work in higher education. The first emphasizes the two-tiered nature of arts training within CCD—conventional technique and the techniques of devising art so essential to CCD; the second stresses the centrality of cultivating an artistic voice: 
Any of the major kind of veteran practitioners that we look up to will say you have to be an artist. You know, Joe Shmo can’t do that effectively, you have to be an artist, and you have to know how to make art. And the other thing about most training programs is, they don’t teach you how to make art. I mean even at [my university drama department], almost everyone was just telling you how to follow directions as an actor, and maybe how to be creative within your own realm as an actor in relation to a playwright and a director, but not really how to make art from scratch, which is what community-based artists have to do. When I say there has to be regular technique training, it also requires the redefinition of what techniques we’re talking about. You have to have some basic skills in your art form, but you also need to know how to create work and you need to know how to collaborate, all of those are part of the techniques of a community based artist. And that’s different from theory and history and policy and those other things that can happen in a regular classroom or studio room. 
As someone who has come to the work as an artist, I worry about the political approach that makes certain that advocacy and message takes priority in a curriculum over also making sure that the skills and the cultivating of the artistic voice of the student is absolutely as important.... My 
The Curriculum Project Report  9 September 2008 
dream curriculum doesn’t put the artist there and say that the other stuff is less important, but it absolutely has to be more important than—like if you’re training to be a community-based worker or an organizer, there’s a whole world you have to learn. If you’re training to be a theatre artist who’s going to work in community-based settings, or a community-based theatre artist, the artist part has to be really solid and strong, or I’m not sure what you have to bring to those projects. 
SCHOLARSHIP 
Scholarship too has different meanings depending on perspective. The strongest impression that came through multiple responses was a desire for scholarship in the service of action, rather than distanced or abstract study of subjects that might not affect practice. To the extent that scholarship was seen to serve action, participants valued study that incorporates critical reflection, that engages with complex questions an engaged observer might ask about the community realities faced by practitioners. For instance, this practitioner emphasizes the need to engage local communities in understanding how they have been affected by larger historical forces, to avoid abstracting that inquiry from grassroots realities: 
Scholarship is important, it’s important for us to understand.... When you look at the academic aspect of it, there’s so much knowledge to be absorbed out there that that is a very important piece of understanding historical context and being able to look at and analyze the community situation that you’re in. What does it mean that this community has been facing the same particular plight for   0 years? What does it mean for this other community over here that faced the same situation over a hundred years ago but is no longer there? When did the transition happen? We have the experiences in our own community to really be able to point all that stuff out. It’s just acknowledging that and taking it to heart and not taking it for granted. So I wouldn’t want to confine even that academic and scholarship part of it to a classroom. The classroom becomes one small piece of a much larger community-based puzzle. The following elaboration of scholarship, from a friend of the field with many years of both organizational and educational experience, stresses willingness to interrogate one’s own assumptions, avoiding the orthodoxies that can restrict even as innovative and improvisational a practice as CCD: 
Part of scholarship is not just the history of community arts. It’s understanding what it means to be a comunity organizer if you’re saying you’re one or, if you’re saying you’re anti-gentrification, it’s really understanding what gentrification means in its complexities. There’s a scholarship component about what it is you’re trying to change in the world, if it’s about social change, and why, and the history of those social movements that give you an analysis. It’s learning how to develop an analysis and understanding enough content to be able to do that, so you’re not just dropping yourself into campaigns, but you have a theory of social change and you know how to act within it. 
So that would be one piece, and then the other piece is the part that keeps you from becoming complacent. It’s the challenge from younger generations in the work and saying, “Well, how do you institutionalize risk-taking?” and challenging yourself constantly. And I think that needs to be built into it. As I’ve experienced this, there is a sort of canon for community arts that in the past has left out a lot of work. So as a result, the sort of white community arts world hasn’t interacted with some of the other worlds, and the people in the other movements, like the hip-hop movement, may not get to study their history because it’s not included. There’s got to be some mechanism where there’s a constant critique and renewing and rethinking that makes it not get rigid.... It’s not just young people, it’s immigrant communities. It’s communities who are talked about in community arts, but I don’t feel like are really part of creating the curriculum. And there needs to be a way that they are on their own terms. 
SOCIAL JUSTICE 
To articulate the underlying goal of CCD, The Curriculum Project’s creators drew on the inspiring words Reverend James Lawson wrote nearly fifty years ago for the founding statement of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee: “a social order of justice permeated by love.” When it comes to the social-justice 
The Curriculum Project Report 20 September 2008 
underpinnings of CCD, people seem to be trying for a nuanced view incorporating the understanding that the sloganeering and militancy sometimes associated with social-justice activism are not necessarily compatible with a practice that values dialogue, one with a high tolerance for difference and the ability to hold contradiction without forcing a conclusion. This practitioner is also involved in educational programs: 
It’s not exactly a direct question, but when we’re interviewing for applicants, why you’re doing this work is definitely part of what we’re looking at. But the answer isn’t necessarily a treatise on social justice—that’s not the answer that people are giving. But when we’re hearing answers that have to do with helping the disadvantaged or something like that, that’s not usually a person we’re going to be interested in. It’s not that every value is shared, and it’s not even that it’s all explicit. I’m not so concerned about the vocabulary in which they would state their values or that we have to talk about it in a language of social justice. But I do think that there’s almost an assumption that that’s there in the ways that we talk about things. 
Explicit or not, the underlying value persists and many practitioners continue to grapple with it, as this educator describes: 
I struggle to make sure that the debate remains current, not a debate about whether we should have a social-justice perspective or not, but my assumption has been one that the work must be grounded in some broader perspective and central purposes which go beyond the creation of art itself. To bring that perspective sharper and refine our policy was something that was a challenge to me and something we continue to do.... One of the things that we certainly ground people in is a Freirian perspective on art and education. And look at constructivist theories of education more broadly and introduce people to those areas in the less traditional theatre world of practices such as Boal, of people who were saying we should not be divorcing arts and politics, and what we’re doing and why we do it is as important as how we do it. It’s not like we want to impose this on our people. But there are histories that coincide, there are perceptions that you share and aspirations that you share, then you find ways of relating this to successive generations’ advances and at least asking them to address questions that I think ought to give them answers. 
Several interviewees pointed to the necessity and challenge of engaging students with a critical perspective on their own motives and roles in doing this work: 
I feel like there is this great untapped mass of young people who really, really want to change the world that we’re living in. They really do, they believe in it. They have no idea how to do it. They have extremely naïve, possibly racist beliefs. They don’t have any framework: like a lot of students call me up and say, “I want to bring art to the poor children of the inner city.” I cannot blame them. They have been badly educated. They don’t know, given where they’ve grown up. They don’t have the same contacts as I do. It doesn’t make them bad people. They have an actual burning passion to try and make the world a better place. They feel they have very few resources. Where to go to do work that is meaningful, that means something to them and makes them feel like they’re doing anything to make the world better? And so what do they start doing? They start cruising for graduate programs because that seems like what you do when you want to make the world better. In my ideal world, we would figure out other ways of channeling that energy besides going to get a Masters degree, because that’s not always the answer. 
The speaker below is a friend of the field who sees social-justice values as deriving from encounters in community, rather than leading to them: 
I am currently a little bit less concerned with starting from an explicit social-justice perspective. I would expect that perspective to develop in ways that might even surprise us through the work directly. I admire [a particular person’s] work. It did not start out with any pretensions of building up a program that was all about social justice or for that matter any pretensions about building a program that was about youth development. He wanted to make theatre with teen-agers, period. They have engaged a wide range of social-justice issues in all of their shows on a consistent basis because they have committed to the rigor of an artistic process that evolves with engaging the world around them. It’s sort of unavoidable. I admire that. It’s an honest way to get there. Sometimes I’m just a little bit afraid that our generation has partly failed to change the world in the ways we hoped we could because we embraced political methods that were really kind of old 
The Curriculum Project Report 2  September 2008 
school. There was a way in which we never managed to articulate a genuine American expression of social justice and critique. We never managed to articulate it in an American vernacular. This speaker is a practitioner and educator who perceives a dialectical relationship between making art and making social justice: 
It’s very, very naïve for a group of artists to say, “We’re going to do this play and it’s going to change the world in this way and we’re going to make everybody feel this way about this issue through our play.” That’s hopelessly naïve. But it is equally naïve and even more dangerous to think that art does not change the world and does not change people’s lives. So you can’t be naïve about how you think it’s going to change people’s lives but you cannot be naïve about thinking, “Oh, it’s just art, it doesn’t change people’s lives,” because we know it does, because we know our truth is informed by the works of art that we’ve experienced as audience members as well as participants. I’ve seen really misguided attempts where the social-justice aims are on the sleeve of the project or of the artist and where I feel like actually this project is not as effective as it could be. And I’ve seen projects where people say, “We’re just trying to create the most beautiful work of art we can,” but through social engagement, in order to create something more beautiful, there’s actually profound movement. I think it has to be part of the dialogue, but I don’t subscribe to there’s only one correct way to go at this kind of work, and if you don’t clearly state what your social-justice goals are then the work is invalid or the work is not significant. I don’t feel that at all. The question of where a program’s center of gravity is located is crucial for the next practitioner/educator: is the educator accountable to an institution or a larger community—or both? 
Social-justice consciousness is stronger in the community organizations than it is in the university-based projects. You have more of a grassroots organization, that that’s their mission, they’re in the community, and they’re arts organizations that are advocates for their community, and they’re activists, they have that activist consciousness. It is about self-determination and power relations on their constituents’ behalf. There’s a danger when you get into the university that you’re removed from that: even if you used to be that, suddenly you find yourself a service provider. That’s really the work of transforming a university. So I don’t see much of it yet in the university, and I think there’s deep work to be done there as artists in the arts faculty. In sum, Curriculum Project research revealed a fairly broad consensus that ideally, education for community cultural development must incorporate a balance of community engagement, training in artistic skills and CCD methods and scholarship focusing on relevant history and social context. Moreover, there is a real hunger for depth, the expressed wish that educational opportunities be informed by social awareness, self-questioning and a critical discourse that encompasses both university and community realities. The next section explores how people compared the present state of development with these ideals. 
The Curriculum Project Report 22 September 2008 
SeCTion 3: The STATe of CommuniTY CulTurAl develoPmenT in hiGher eduCATion 
Condense Curriculum Project participants’ assessment of the current state of CCD in higher education to a few lines, and here is what they would say: More and more people are trying very hard to make it work, with differential results ranging from extremely promising to dismal; few individuals know enough about the entire field to generalize reliably about it; and while both hopes and cautions are on high alert, it’s too soon to tell where this may lead. 
Summarizing what interviewees and survey respondents told us about their own programs and others, this section of the report explores their assessment of the current state of CCD education, focusing primarily on the higher-education context: what we learned about current programs and what people thought about them. (Note that the appendix entitled “A Sampling of Courses and Programs” includes descriptions of a range of existing programs and courses.) 
WHY HIGHER EDUCATION? 
In this moment of great potential and great uncertainty, interviewees explained why they are working so diligently toward the creation of excellent CCD programs in higher education. Some of their reasons relate to social trends, as one practitioner/educator put it: “We’re in a different phase of history when having an academic training makes people feel more secure.” Some are personal: another noted that as an educator, “You get a pension.” Some are grounded in the advantages of the academic framework: greater resources, a larger potential scale, the opportunity to reflect on practice and create new knowledge, the ability to grant credentials and legitimate practice, a range of courses, commitment to critical thinking and intellectual rigor. But most expressed a passionate wish to help legitimate CCD, to bring it into the mainstream, creating access to the social and economic advantages academia confers—for example, this educator: 
For the longest time I felt there was a big need to pull experiences together and to offer opportunities in a more coherent way. The most important reason is raising the standards of practice in a very important area of artistic and social intervention. But along with that, there are subsidiary aims such as legitimizing the work in the eyes of the world. Throughout a lot of my professional career I’ve encountered the attitude of “You only do this because you can’t do something else,” not really understanding or respecting the wealth of talent and achievement that exists here and across the world in often hidden corners. It’s building networks as well, contacting other people, finding time to reflect with other people. I know how hard that is if you are a practicing professional for whom one of the big pressures is always how do I do the work, and how do I sustain myself when I’m doing it? And I guess that’s why it has been easier for development to take place inside the academy, because that is somewhere where people have at least some sort of job security, which does not always exist in the world. 
Implicit in “raising the standards of practice” is developing a useful analysis of the cultural landscape to inform practice, achieving a critical perspective on the large questions of cultural development CCD addresses: 
One of the things that’s important about the university is, even though it’s subject to all kinds of pressure of commercialization, of privatization, of everything that everything else is subject to from prisons to hospitals to everything else that was once considered part of the public sphere—it is at least a place where one can make a claim on the necessity of a critical orientation to the world. Even now in business, it’s common practice to say, “Oh yes, we have to be self-reflective, we have to be self-critical, we’re not just embracing diversity, we also have to reflect on what went wrong in order to do it right.” Having a focus on that critique is one of the things that is important about the university as a site. The nature of the program you craft, and how you teach, and what you teach, and who you teach, matters a great deal if you’re going to keep that space open. 
What keeps sending me back to academia and higher education is that I felt like, in our nonprofit social-justice organizing work there isn’t enough reflection, critique and critical analysis. People spend so much time trying to implement or manage a project, or raise funds for the next 
The Curriculum Project Report 2  September 2008 
project, or support and promote the general operations of the organization, and never sit back and take a look at what is really going on. When the university functions as a collaborating partner, entering into equitable and reciprocal relationships with community organizations, people believe the partnership can enrich both parties: 
You bring young people with the commitment and the desire to learn and grow, and you’ve made sure the community workers can have more peers, especially if it’s well done. The university also brings access to libraries, resources, networks, all that kind of information that the university knows how to tap. The ability to help find grants and fundraising: universities and colleges have money for this kind of thing, to get that brought into the community organization. A lot of the writing courses that go on, even if they’re not deeply analytic, they come out and they can help people prepare materials and write newsletters and publicity and grants and so on. There’s a tremendous amount that the university has in resources that the community organization doesn’t have as easily. In short, many reasons were cited for situating community cultural development programs within higher education. For the determined advocates who have driven this movement to integrate CCD and higher ed, the promise outweighs the challenges discussed in the next section of this report. And they see very real progress, as this educator described: 
I’m seeing the times are kind of changing. I’m seeing that they’re beginning to—there is legitimacy that I don’t believe that we need, but there is legitimacy that is kind of needed particularly in higher ed, that says, “Yes, this can be accepted into the canon. This is worthy.” That’s always a slow process. It’s going to be a long time before we get to the point of where the sciences have been regarded, sciences and literature, in terms of resources needed to educate students the way that they feel they need to be educated and the access to resources that they need. I think we’re a long way from obtaining equity on that level, but I do see it coming. 
FROM IDEAL TO ACTUAL IN HIGHER EDUCATION 
But as yet, there is a widely perceived gap between aspirations and accomplishments. Of those who responded to our survey question assessing the state of the field, the majority ranked it no higher than “fair”: 4% excellent, 26% good, 38% fair, 14% poor, with the remainder indicating “don’t know.” Within these numbers, observers from outside academia were most critical: 45% of friends of the field rated it fair and 21% poor; and 44% of community artists and organization leaders ranked it fair, with another 17% ranking it poor. Ambitions are high, many programs are just beginning, and almost no one felt that current higher educational programs have yet achieved their aspirations. 
Education for community artists still feels rather limited, especially for theatre. Very few degrees, courses here and there, and faculty who take on these classes because it’s a “hot topic” but are not versed in the field. It’s growing, but it doesn’t seem to be growing as fast as the community arts ed programs in the visual arts. 
It’s a new and growing field. Artists today are getting a better education than those who preceded them, but I would expect continued improvement as the field matures. 
Scattered programs with nominal field infrastructure. Many fine people are working on programs, but as far as I know, this is the first real assessment of how they are in relationship to a vision of what they could be. I don’t know of any with a great balance among the three components, and few with enough time to do it all well, and none that link students to jobs in the field as a rule. 
Oh, it’s poor. Almost non-existent. Certainly not at the level of systems change and sustainable. Nowhere near, not even close. Maybe just beginning. We still have the champion who’s an exception, not the rule at an institution. It’s champion-driven, not value-sustainable, you know, it’s not at a point where it’s something that is considered like if you take arts classes, taking landscape or portrait, it’s not a canon yet. There’s a lot of technique training going on. But I see very little real scholarship. Nor are they getting the skills and techniques they need in order to be able to sustain their work. 
The Curriculum Project Report 2  September 2008 
There are many more programs these days than in my student days, and I am excited by the growth in the field. Indeed, research participants expressed persistent doubts about higher education’s ability to provide a foundation for community cultural development practice. Slightly more than half (53%) of survey respondents who replied to our question about the best mode of undergraduate-level education for CCD chose higher educational institutions, while 78% chose community-based apprenticeship or training. (Respondents could provide more than one answer.) 
I’m frankly an agnostic about does this really belong in the colleges and universities. I’m not absolutely convinced of it. I worry that it can be academicized and denatured. I’m deeply worried about kids investing a lot of time and money in school to go out into a job market that doesn’t place much value on this kind of work, and it’s a hard life. There are obviously a few folks who figured out strategies to make it work for them in the country over long periods of time, but I dare say that there’s an awful lot more who haven’t, and for whom it became a burnout or a sort of sad chapter in their lives. And it’s such joyous work to do when it’s done well. I find it so sad that so much of it is tainted by the dead hand of the bureaucracies that dole out the money or the dead hand of the bureaucracies that engineer the programs so that they are so much less than the artists could make them. 
I think the models where people bring community artists-in-residence, where they’re functioning as university extenders into the community, that you’re going to get more depth. What happens in many of the different programs I see is someone in the university teaching a course in something called community arts, and the whole thing happens often in one semester or two, and the faculty person is kind of doing an introduction to the field and maybe supervising an internship. But what I want more of is others who are really doing the work on bridging teaching in the university and doing work out in the community—whose artwork, so to speak, is doing that work.... When you bring in people who really do the work in communities and make a space for them in universities, I think what you get is the apprenticeship learning that is required. What we need to be doing from the university side is the meaning-making and self-reflective work, which is about a depth of development of social-justice skills, awareness, exploration of identity, and we can do a decent job with that in the university. And then take students who are having a chance to do that to apprentice with artists in the community, at least on the undergraduate level. 
I certainly don’t think that it’s impossible in the university. I think there could be a lot of really good things about it being part of a university. But things that scare me are: is somebody going to have to have a credential in order to do this work? That scares me both in terms of what a credential conveys, and also not everybody goes to college, it doesn’t seem the necessary way. I don’t want the field to narrow down in bad ways. I think that it’s very good to have conversations about what training is and what needs to be learned. But I think that sometimes in my work, somebody who’s just completely come from the streets—there are certain skills that they’re going to need, but they can really come in to just work and be way more effective. 
Universities are really under-utilized resources with space and technical assistance and housing and all kinds of things. But I also think we need to look at other models. I think both are really important. 
Whatever we’re doing with the community-based work in the institution, the institution has to begin to reflect the community, and it has to be more engrained in community, it can’t be seen as an outside opposing force while trying to teach the principles of community. The education system as it has been for so long is used as a validating system, and it inducts the so-called educated as the leaders of a civilized society, whereas on the underside of that, when you’re talking about community, especially community development through the arts, you’re talking about institutional practices that have been forged by those on the ground floor. And those people are usually the poor and uneducated. So you’re talking about two opposite ends of the spectrum, and one is trying to teach these principles and practices that are basically grounded in the community in an institution that is not grounded in community. 
The Curriculum Project Report 2  September 2008 
In this context, it’s interesting to note that by far the largest percentage of community artists and organizational leaders taking part in our surveys describe their own mode of education as “self-taught” (60%) and/or “apprenticeship” (47%). Although the percentages are lower, the ranking is the same for educators: 44% indicated “self-taught” and 35% indicated “apprenticeship.” In the aggregate, more than half (56%) of these two categories of respondents also attended undergraduate art school or liberal arts college, and 40% indicated postgraduate work at either type of institution, with educators’ greater formal education pushing up the totals. While it’s impossible to know the precise extent to which higher education enhanced their ability to teach CCD, this points to a notable challenge for those undertaking CCD programs in higher education: how to impart in the more structured and formal setting of a university the ideas, practices, skills and sensibilities they learned in very different ways, through on-the-ground experience and self-directed study. 
As we spoke with interviewees about the value of higher education for CCD, most expressed the wish that education for this field include both modes with equal legitimacy, rather than privileging the university on account of its ability to confer credentials. Both these speakers are educators: 
They’re both leading to the same sort of end. I have hired community artists, practitioners that don’t have formal educations but are just as stellar as artists. The faculty that I’ve hired with M.F.A.s, Ph.D.’s aren’t all that matter. Education does not mean that you’re more learned. You can have just as much knowledge in terms of theory and history by not going to college that you do get going to college. I think the one thing that college gives you, it’s sort of a directed study. You have people saying, “You know, you should read this and you should try to do it this way.” They’re directing your learning, as opposed to someone who is not educated. Their learning comes from a different place. It comes from trial and error, it comes from who they’re introduced to and what they’re introduced to, it comes from a sense of agency, sometimes it comes from because I have to understand this. But I don’t value one over the other. I think they’re just different roads and they’re different mechanisms. 
The universities have the luxury of time and resources. I mean, we feel rushed all the time, and we are rushed and crazed all the time, but we have incredible luxuries. You know, just the fact that I have a budget to buy books. Just the fact that I can work with students and talk about ideas. It’s a luxury. In the global scheme of things, it’s an expectation among academics, but it’s really a luxury to be able to do this as a way of making a living; it’s a luxury be able to work with students and to be able to learn from them. I see working with students and working with community folks as both collaborative processes. It becomes a question about how you create linkages between these two sites of work, that then can be really beneficial in terms of building something larger other than reproducing academia. 
Almost as many participants as have opinions about the overall state of CCD in higher education feel unable to adequately assess the field, saying they lack firsthand knowledge. Among educators responding to our survey—by definition those most closely involved—42% replied “don’t know” to our question concerning the overall quality of higher educational offerings for the field. Few of those attached to any specific program have had in-depth experience of programs at other institutions. There has been very little critical writing (as opposed to promotional writing about one’s own or one’s colleagues’ work). People are understandably cautious about generalizing based on things like presentations at conferences or a review of written program descriptions, as indicated by many participants’ responses to our question about the overall quality of the field in the United States: 
There’s ways that we all talk about our programs and then there’s being inside of it and living it. So it’s hard for me to get a sense of what all of our goals are, how that translates into the reality for our students. 
This is one where I will beg off and say I don’t consider myself an authority, but I what will I say is that the stuff I know the best is the stuff that is here at [my own institution]. 
I feel a need to know a lot more about many other educational institutions and programs before I could possibly come to an assessment. 
I have only a vague sense of the educational opportunities out there, but I know some are excellent, and certainly there are more opportunities than before. 
The Curriculum Project Report 2  September 2008 
I can’t say that I have a really good current sense of that, but just from hearing colleagues talk about it over the past few years anyway, my own experience both as a student and as a person/ educator in higher education, I think it’s pretty bad. The large percentage of respondents who feel they lack adequate knowledge to assess the field points very clearly to a need for infrastructure—the ways and means for constituents of the field to become acquainted with each other, to become colleagues and to enter into a mutually supportive discourse. These topics are explored in later sections of this report. 
SCOPE OF CCD EDUCATION 
There is no central body awarding credentials or offering an imprimatur to CCD programs; indeed, at this point in the ripening of the field, self-identification is the only recognized criterion. What seems apparent—not only from Curriculum Project research but also from other indicators such as participation in community arts related dialogues and Web sites—is that many more educators feel an affinity to the field than have as yet succeeded (or even endeavored to succeed) in creating substantial programs. 
Consider the appendix to this report entitled “A Sampling of Courses and Programs.” It contains information on many courses and programs, but omits some of those whose creators submitted listings to the Community Arts Network’s places to study (http://www.communityarts.net/training/index.php), which includes degrees in arts tourism, public administration and other subjects bearing some relationship to art or community, but not conceived as preparation for CCD per se. Similarly, some of the syllabi educators have submitted for CAN’s collection (http://www.communityarts.net/canu/syllabi/index.php) focus on art and social issues, but don’t specifically address CCD. 
As a result, it is difficult to quantify the phenomenon of CCD in higher education. More than four-fifths (81%) of the educators who responded to our survey checked a box indicating that they offer one or more CCD degrees. But in their explanatory notes, half of them said they did not, and many of the remainder listed degree programs that may include some reference to CCD but are not focused on that practice, such as: “interdisciplinary individualized college degrees,” “M.A. in Theatre Education,” “Arts degrees involve the community,” “we’re developing an arts management program,” “M.A. in Cultural Studies and B.A. in Interdisciplinary Arts.” However, it is clear that CCD has made inroads: of the 85% who indicated they offer individual CCD courses, most listed subjects that are inarguably core to CCD education, such as: “Theatre for Development,” “Community-based Theatre,” “Building Community through the Arts,” “Interactive/Boal-Based Theatre” and “The Artist as Organizer.” 
Some educators suggested that this is the way new knowledge becomes part of academia: it starts with a course or two, aggregates into a minor or certificate, and eventually a major is formulated, proposed and approved. Focusing just on those higher-education offerings that meet the criteria suggested earlier in this report—those that intend to prepare students for work that is “collaborative and participatory, egalitarian in style and outlook, self-directed by all participants, oriented as much to process as to product, linking each individual’s development to the development of community”—reveals a relatively small crop of offerings in various stages of ripening, a developmental trajectory that seems to fit this pattern. At some institutions, one or two courses function as an introduction to the practice; at others, a minor, emphasis or certificate program has started in the last few years; and as the work of dedicated practitioners and educators begins to be harvested, undergraduate and graduate degree programs have come into being. For instance, these survey respondents report on their own progress on the path to developing CCD programs: 
Right now there are just two classes that I teach under special topics numbers. But I want to create a stronger series of courses for a “thematic sequence” (kinda like a minor) and I’m looking for ways to connect to other interdisciplinary programs on campus that have a focus on community engagement. 
I inherited an M.F.A. program in Directing when I joined the faculty. I used the existing framework (which was pretty much a generic “directing for anyone in any context” approach) to begin to build my own approach, seeking students who wanted to work on grass-roots, community-based, ensemble theatre making. 
The Curriculum Project Report 2  September 2008 
We were given funding to create the proposal for a major. It received approval from all the campus committees save one. There is no funding for a facility to house the program, and currently we are teaching all of our classes in one room. In other words, the students that take socially engaged art as an elective each quarter are all working in one classroom. We cannot grow the program without administrative leadership, and the final campus committee put our program on hold until there is a clear decision to give our program the space and funding it deserves. 
We don’t have a sanctioned program. Working on developing a possible certificate program in community arts, through the Office of Academic Service Learning. 
For the present, in addition to creativity, determination and endurance, educators and their allies need to engage critically with questions of scale. How much impact can one or two courses have on preparing students for CCD practice? If what is available leaves out some of the three fundamentals of CCD education—training, scholarship and community engagement—is it premature to make claims of efficacy? This educator counsels a long view, high standards and perseverance: 
It’s a long haul. And the advice I’d give to somebody else is do the course, do the work and do it really, really well and responsibly and you’re going to get great evaluations from students and it’s going to get recognized because you’ve done it well. And think hard about how you articulate it, because there are ways to articulate that are convincing to an institution, but the main thing is to articulate it through good work. 
VARIETIES OF CCD EDUCATION 
One factor that helps to account for the large variations between programs developing now is institutional context. For example, programs sited at visual arts–oriented colleges tend to reflect that orientation, rather than providing training for a range of CCD practices that might draw on music, writing, dance, theatre and so on: 
[One program] is much more for practitioners, especially visual artists. Students are going to talk a lot about aesthetics. They’re also going to talk about community development, but they’re going to do art projects in communities or with people in communities; they’re going to do artistic projects that are going to be focused on aesthetics and making. [Another program] addresses issues of like social justice, economic justice, and there’s definitely a high level of engagement in practice in the community. 
This higher education-based interviewee also sees differences that seem to be shaped by institutional character, arts schools versus liberal arts colleges: 
There are characteristic gaps. I see liberal arts institutions tend to be doing more of the research and the writing, because the classes are situated in sociology or political science or even anthropology. And for the art colleges, it tends to be more practical hands-on and less of the writing and theorizing. That’s the reason why both liberal arts and arts higher-ed institutions really need to be interacting more with each other, so that we really do begin to understand the value for arts students in training them on both sides. 
No one who took part in this research suggested that these differences should (or even could) be erased. Instead, as will be evident from the section on “Sustainable Education for CCD” later in this report, people are searching for flexible modes of curriculum design that convey the essentials while allowing for significant variations conditioned on institutional character. 
PERCEPTIONS OF EXISTING PROGRAMS 
The educators and students taking part in Curriculum Project surveys ranked aspects of their own programs in terms of positives and negatives, as follows: 
The Curriculum Project Report 28 September 2008 
Positive Negative 
Quality and amount of emphasis on reflection and analysis 
83% 11% 
Commitment to social-justice values 
75% 17% 
Faculty quality and community arts experience 
67% 17% 
Length of program 61% 22% Quality and quantity of studio work 
56% 31% 
Quality and amount of emphasis on scholarship 
56% 31% 
Strength of community engagement 
53% 36% 
Balance between community arts and other requirements 
50% 25% 
Affordability 47% 39% 
Race and class studies were the most widely taught subjects under the general heading of scholarship: 81% of educators listed them; 73% percent listed the history of community arts; 69% listed community arts theory; 62% listed Freire and Boal-inspired studies; and 62% listed principles and ethics of practice. The remaining subject areas—community organizing history and theory, community development history and theory, cultural policy, feminist studies and post-colonial theory—were listed by no more than 39%, and most by significantly fewer. 
Under training, collectively created performance was listed as part of programs by 59%; studio arts and Boal-inspired performance and workshops by 44% each; oral history–based work by 41%; collectively created media (film, video, audio, etc.) by 33%; group dynamics by 30%; and public art and community organizing techniques and approaches by 26% each. 
The emphasis on performance reflects the field’s profile: it is generally accepted that in the U.S., there are more community artists active in theatre than any other type of arts work, and superior infrastructure exists to facilitate their work and bring them into contact with their peers, such as annual conferences and international associations focused on Theatre of the Oppressed (Augusto Boal’s work). 
When we asked educators to situate themselves within a field by naming their colleagues, the largest group (84%) listed “others in higher education working on community engagement” and behind that, 78% listed “artists and non-artists working in community organizing or development.” Indeed, the categories associated with community activism consistently ranked higher than others: 64% listed “all other artists working in community”; 60% listed “other social activists”; 49% listed “other artists in my discipline working in community” and “other community-based artists working in my specific area (e.g., in prisons, schools, or with elders)”; and just 36% listed “other artists in my discipline, however they work.” 
When we asked survey participants to name the associations to which they belong or the conferences they attend, the responses were quite different for educators and community artists/organizational representatives. Imagining America was by far the most common affiliation for educators (with 16 mentions), while Alternate ROOTS (a performing arts service organization focused on community and activism) was the most common affiliation for community artists (12 mentions). The range of groups mentioned was impressive: there were 223 listings in addition to those tallied below, including many regional groups (e.g., Arts Wisconsin, Twin Cities US Social Forum, Vashon Allied Arts) and professional specialty–related groups (National Council for Educators of Ceramic Arts, Grantmakers in the Arts, The Asia Society). The following list includes all those mentioned three or more times. Once again, the list conveys the predominance of performing arts interest in the field. Although most of the list reflects mentions by both educators and community artists, several groups were mentioned only by community artists, as indicated: 
The Curriculum Project Report 2  September 2008 
imagining America (20 mentions) 
Americans for the Arts (18 mentions): Of the 18, 8 referred specifically to Animating Democracy. 
Alternate rooTS (15 mentions) 
national Performance network (10 mentions) 
Pedagogy and Theatre of the oppressed (9 mentions) 
Community Arts Partnership convenings (9 mentions): These refer to conferences by a consortium of higher education programs held at the Center for Art and Public Life at California College of the Arts in 2006 and the Maryland Institute College of Art in 2008. 
network of ensemble Theatres (7 mentions) 
Community Arts network (6 mentions): CAN is a Web-based portal for the field, not a membership organization or a conference presenter, but because it was listed so often, it is included here. 
ArtServe michigan (5 mentions, community artists only) 
Association of Theatre in higher education (4 mentions) 
Association of Performing Arts Presenters (3 mentions) 
College Art Association (3 mentions) 
national Alliance of media Arts and Culture (3 mentions, community artists only) 
Theatre Communications Group (3 mentions, community artists only) 
 
national Guild of Community Schools of The Arts (3 mentions, community artists only) 
DEEPENING COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT 
Despite the significant differences between higher educational programs grounded in different art forms or types of institution, an underlying direction in most programs’ development is recognition of the need to deepen the practice of community engagement. As noted earlier, only 53% of educators and students saw the strength of their own institutions’ community engagement as a positive, and 36% saw it as a negative. When asked what elements make up their current programs, 82% of educators and students responding to our surveys indicated community engagement, the highest percentage for any element; 42% of educators also indicated that current training in community engagement is insufficient. Both the aspiration and the need are evident, and people are working hard to close gaps. 
The educators who took part in our survey choose commitment to community engagement as the strongest value animating their programs (82%), with pursuit of social justice second (68%). Most of the community engagement projects described by participants are one semester long, although a few were as short as a week or as long as several years. A few responses to a question abut the goals of community engagement focused on community impact, like this one: 
To make publicly visible the intersection of the art and the art-making processes with community concerns and conversations. To increase public visibility of concerns and perspectives of specific communities. To join in the activism for social change forwarded by specific organizing groups. 
But the majority of the goals described were educational and experiential aims for students: “students to experience entering, engagement with, and leaving or continuing with group,” “the goal is to teach students that they can make a difference in the lives of others in the community,” ”our project goals are mostly content/educational in student outcomes, but all of the projects have engagement, elaboration, self efficacy, partnership goals as well,” ”enhancing problem-solving skills,” ”student experience with community organizations,” “deepening knowledge of the course subject while serving the community.” 
Educators shared what had been most positive about these experiences: 
Students feel a sense of accomplishment; community appreciation; some projects have continued outside of class. 
Students have strong educational and personal development opportunities. 
What students learn and stated self-esteem gains by people in group. 
The Curriculum Project Report  0 September 2008 
Generally, the projects have provided the students with fertile learning opportunities and the community partners have likewise gained around specifically identified goals: vibrant exchanges, new learning, steps in building community (deepening and expanding). 
Students get day-to-day hands-on experience. 
For the students, finding new meaning to making art. For the organizations, expanding and deepening creative approach to their agenda, plus just more young adults helping. Educators also described what had been most problematic, focusing again and again on the difficulty of giving community engagement adequate time and resources within a higher education framework: 
Trying to do a project in one semester; scheduling; transportation; community trust. Lack of university support for sustainability. 
Team dynamics (inside our student teams) varied. Could use more prep on how to be a great team member in future. 
There is a need for more paid internships. Those who supervise students in community organizations are not always prepared to do this in a constructive way. 
Not enough time at placement, or planning, or working with students outside of class. Not important enough in department to give it the time it needed. 
Limited time for student engagement, short-term projects without long-term perspective, continuity and growth, understanding and commitment to community engagement. 
Interviewees described precisely the same barriers to optimal community engagement practice as were listed by survey participants. Some of them have been able to address the problem. For instance, this interviewee describes an academic department’s shift in self-understanding, leading to investing more effort and value in community engagement: 
A recognized part of our essential work now is getting the department as a functioning, theatre producing, teaching institution overtly aware of groups of people in the community (organizations, churches, civic groups, political groups, particular populations) that have voiced themselves. And for allowing that knowledge, from practical knowledge of data bank and who’s who, and what’s going on and how do you contact this person, etcetera, to a more socially aware comprehension of what this means. On campus, we think about the campus community. Well, there are lots of communities on the campus, and as we become more informed about those particular aspects of the community, we can make much more informed decisions about what kind of theatre we’re making. If community is simply the students, we make plays based on our own aesthetic judgments—and not to fault our own aesthetic judgments, but we just might not be connected with anybody around us! We can also make far more informed decisions about not only the plays we decide we’re going to make, but what projects we might be interested in becoming involved with, either as play-makers or simply as citizens. 
In the section of this report entitled “An Abundance of Worthy Challenges,” reasons for these reported difficulties are explored. 
RESOURCES AND INSPIRATIONS 
Given the notable internal diversity of this developing field, it is unsurprising that there is no single program, text or topic deemed integral to all existing programs. Curriculum Project surveys for community artists, educators, friends of the field and students all asked participants to list up to five essential resources for students in CCD. The vast majority of resources were books (rather than videos). In addition to books about community cultural development, listed resources ranged from studies of history and ethnicity to fiction to classic books on specific arts techniques. In addition to the 11 resources listed below, 134 other writers and resources were mentioned in all. The list that follows includes all the resources that received three or more mentions: 

Arlene Goldbard (20 mentions): The specific book titles mentioned were New Creative Community: The Art of Cultural Development and two precursors co-authored with Don Adams (Creative Community: The Art of Cultural Development and Community, Culture and Globalization). 
The Curriculum Project Report    September 2008 
Community Arts network/www.communityarts.net (17 mentions): In addition to noting the CAN Web site as a rich source, participants mentioned two anthologies published by Art in The Public Interest, CAN’s parent organization, Performing Communities: The Grassroots Ensemble Theater Research Project and The Citizen Artist: 20 Years of Art in the Public Arena. 
Paulo freire (14 mentions): One specific book title was mentioned, Pedagogy of The Oppressed. 
jan Cohen-Cruz (13 mentions): The specific book titles mentioned were Local Acts: Community-based Performance in the United States and A Boal Companion: Dialogues on Theatre and Cultural Politics. 
Augusto boal (12 mentions): The specific book titles mentioned were Games for Actors and Non-Actors and Theatre of the Oppressed. 
Animating democracy series published by Americans for the Arts (8 mentions): no specific titles were listed. 
William Cleveland (6 mentions): The specific titles mentioned were Art in Other Places, Artists at Work in America’s Community and Social Institutions and Making Exact Change (a report published by the Community Arts Network). 
michael rohd (4 mentions): The specific book title mentioned was Theatre for Community, Conflict, and Dialogue. 
Suzanne lacy (4 mentions): The specific book title mentioned was Mapping The Terrain: New Genre Public Art. 
james bau Graves (3 mentions): The specific book title mentioned was Cultural Democracy: The Arts, Community, and the Public Purpose. 
robert Gard (3 mentions): The specific book title mentioned was Grassroots Theater: A Search for Regional Arts in America. 
Survey respondents were also asked to name “exemplary programs you feel are educating community artists effectively today.” Many of them had difficulty doing so with certainty: their lists are peppered with phrases such as “I only know programs by hearsay” and “I’ve heard that....” Only one-third of the educators who completed the survey responded to this question, also indicating difficulty in making assessments based on scant or secondhand knowledge (understandable, as some of the most widely known programs are new and have been completed by only a handful of students thus far). Community artists and friends of the field were much more likely to list community-based programs than were educators and students: short term institutes offered by well-respected nonprofits were also frequently mentioned by interviewees. Several programs were included only by those outside academia, as noted below. Apart from the programs listed below, which received three or more mentions, 105 other academic or community-based initiatives were listed, from specific degree programs such as the Cultural Policy Program at The Ohio State University; to programs focused on a small number of courses or a unifying project, such as PCAP: Prison Creative Arts Project at the University of Michigan; to non-academic programs such as Alternate ROOTS’ Resources for Social Change training initiative. Many individual mentions were made of training elements within particular community-based organizations, either those devised for their own staff members and volunteers or those they conduct as part of community residencies. 
California College of the Arts, Oakland, CA (14 mentions): Participants made specific reference to programs associated with the Center for Art and Public Life. 
Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, IL (7 mentions): Participants who listed specific initiatives referred to the Master of Arts Management Degree in Arts in Youth and Community Development and the Center for Community Arts Partnerships. 
Cornerstone Theater, Los Angeles, CA (7 mentions): The Cornerstone Institute Summer Residency Program was specifically mentioned. 
maryland institute College of Art, Baltimore, MD (7 mentions): The specific program mentioned was the Master of Arts in Community Arts. 
 
virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA (5 mentions): Participants made specific reference to the Master of Fine Arts in Directing and Public Dialogue. 
The Curriculum Project Report  2 September 2008 
California State university, monterey bay, Seaside, CA (4 mentions): Participants specifically mentioned 
the Bachelor of Arts in Visual and Public Art. 
City university of new York, New York, NY (4 mentions): The specific program mentioned was the Creative Arts Team, located in the School of Professional Studies. 
otis College of Art and design, Los Angeles, CA (4 mentions): Specifically mentioned was the Master of Fine Arts in Public Practice. 
Tisch School of The Arts, New York University, New York, NY (4 mentions): Specific reference was made to the Minor in Applied Theatre and the Interactive Telecommunications Program. 
intermedia Arts institute for Community Cultural development, Minneapolis, MN (4 mentions, non academics only). 
liz lerman dance exchange, Takoma Park, MD (4 mentions, non-academics only): The specific program mentioned was the Summer Institute. 
Tyler College of Arts, Temple University (4 mentions, non-academics only): Participants made specific reference to the Cross-Disciplinary Arts in Community Program. 
Sojourn Theatre Summer institute, Portland, OR (3 mentions, non-academics only). 
urban bush Women Summer institute, Brooklyn, NY (3 mentions, non-academics only). Recognizing the newness of CCD as an academic specialty in the United States, we also asked survey respondents to name “any other fields, institutions or organizations that handle education in a way that community cultural development education could effectively adapt.” Our aim was to elicit models, or at least inspirations, but the responses revealed that most participants were not thinking along those lines. Fewer than one-third of survey respondents chose to answer this question, and many of those who did again mentioned the same programs listed above, rather than looking to other fields. From the balance of responses and comments of interviewees, it was possible to discern certain commonalities. 
Study leading to action, rooted in community: For example, the Highlander Center in New Market, Tennessee was mentioned more than once: modeled on the folk-school concept, Highlander’s program started in the 1930s as “a residential educational program designed to help build a broad-based, racially integrated, and politically active labor movement in the South.” That mission morphed and expanded over the years, but it has always been premised on a principle highly consonant with CCD values: “The founding principle and guiding philosophy of Highlander is that the answers to the problems facing society lie in the experiences of ordinary people. Those experiences, so often belittled and denigrated in our society, are the keys to grassroots power.” (The preceding quotations are from Highlander’s Web site, www.highlandercenter.org.) Other community-based and action-oriented educational centers and initiatives were also mentioned. 
flexibility and individual attention: Several participants made mention of independent-study programs, such as the Master of Fine Arts in Directing and Public Dialogue at Virginia Tech and a Masters program at the University of Chicago, that allow each student to shape a course of study that fulfills individual interests and aspirations. 
Community engagement and hands-on learning: Several participants spoke of leadership training programs, mostly designed for young or mid-career professionals. For instance, the Coro Fellows Program is “a nine-month, full-time, post-graduate experiential leadership training program which introduces diverse, intelligent and driven individuals to all aspects of the public affairs arena. Field assignments, site visits, interviews and special individual and group projects prepare Coro Fellows to translate their ideals into action for improving their own communities.” (The preceding quotations are from the Coro Foundation’s Web site, http://www.coro.org/.) 
 
Activism taught by activists: There were frequent mentions of projects such as the camps and institutes of Wellstone Action in St. Paul, Minnesota, where those experienced in particular forms of organizing create short-term intensive learning opportunities tailored to specific settings and constituencies (such as Wellstone’s initiatives on labor organizing and Native American organizing). 
The Curriculum Project Report    September 2008 
OUTCOMES 
Educators who took part in the Curriculum Project survey were asked what outcomes students in their programs could typically expect. The two most-chosen answers led all others by a wide gap: “satisfaction with the experience” and “combining their passions for art and social change” were each checked by 83% of those who responded. “Finding a community of colleagues” was chosen by 57% and “participation in a network of graduates and faculty,” “finding their life’s work” and “solid grounding in community cultural development practice” by 45%. The most concrete outcomes had the lowest scores: “viable job prospects” was chosen by 35% and “effective job placement assistance” by only 17%. 
Response to our student survey was too small to support generalizations, but it is interesting to note that while “satisfaction with the experience” and “finding your life’s work” ranked highest, at 60% each, 60% also expected viable job prospects, and not a single student participant expected effective job placement assistance. As discussed earlier, the challenge of finding employment in an under-funded field affects community artists as a class, and by extension, educational programs. Overall, 13% of student respondents were very satisfied with their CCD educations, 57% were satisfied, 6% somewhat satisfied and 13% unsatisfied (another 13% indicated “don’t know”). 
Every facet of the current field reinforces the same impression. Through our interviews, surveys and review of existing documentation, we saw a field with three salient characteristics: 
It is champion-driven, with highly varied courses and programs shaped very much by the differing sensibilities and outlooks of their founders, passionate and committed advocates, and by the characteristics of their host institutions. 
It is still in formation—ripening, but still far from ripe—with many courses and programs too new to have produced a sufficient body of results for assessment. 
 
It is in need of encouragement and support for a deep, collaborative discourse on key questions that can help it take shape in the most positive way. The preceding snapshot of the field was assembled from participants’ and allies’ own self-descriptions and observations of existing practice. The next section explores some of the challenges to be addressed as the field continues to ripen into its full potential. 
The Curriculum Project Report    September 2008 
SeCTion 4: An AbundAnCe of WorThY ChAllenGeS 
Educating community artists at colleges and universities has something in common with the process immigrants go through in finding a modus vivendi with those already living where they make their new homes. The difficulty is cultural: entering a milieu in which values and practices are strikingly different from one’s own. Both higher educational institutions and the CCD field have their own values and ways of operating, which sometimes conflict. Interviewees understood very well that they had taken on an ambitious, sometimes daunting task in attempting to introduce new knowledge and new ways of learning into long-established and tenaciously guarded institutional cultures. 
For example, because it aims for broad social and cultural change rather than mastering a particular specialty, community cultural development cuts across conventional specializations and categories of knowledge. Many practitioners and educators can imagine CCD programs situated in schools of social science, education or anthropology, in programs focusing on community development, ethnic studies or planning. But in fact, most of the existing programs are based in arts departments, where arts training, internship opportunities and other relevant studies may be available, but where they also often encounter tremendous resistance. It’s a challenging problem: having valorized individual creative genius, conventional artists often perceive the sense of specialness and separateness it confers as a kind of compensation for the material struggles of the professional artist. In this climate, not all arts departments’ faculty and administrators may welcome what they see as an insurgent practice calling this fundamental premise into question. Consider these stories from practitioner-educators: 
I was invited to come back to my old school and give a talk for an afternoon. I was asked to meet with the theater department’s chair about what I was doing. Now he was a guy who, when I was here, although I was a very active theater major, I wasn’t doing the stuff he cared about, which was the musicals and the big plays. He was very, very committed to the old world of teaching theater. I described what I was doing, and he said to me, “This is [name of institution]. Your little fads, your trends, your sort of social stuff, things come and go, but this is [name of institution]. This is the place where we have always been and always will be committed to the traditions of what is really important in our field—acting, directing, design. These other things will happen here and there, but I can’t have you back here to teach a trend, which doesn’t have a place here.” And right now, I’m actually sitting in his old office. 
I’m looking at other departments because the theatre department is for the most part more conventional in what it is training people for. But [this university] has a fantastic social justice education program. And they actually require practicum so I’m trying to talk with them more and other colleges in the area to identify some students who already have some framework that they’re bringing.... I’ve actually had someone higher up at the university say to me about [one community engagement] project, “You know we’re not a social service agency, we’re an arts program. Why are you doing this?” 
As with any subject, there are indeed trends in teaching art, and some of them come wrapped in assertions of their own timeless superiority. This practitioner-educator describes the evolution of visual arts teaching, pointing out the missing pieces that CCD seeks to add: 
The major focus of studio arts is to send people prepared into a commercial gallery system; to get them into the Biennale would be like an ultimate goal. A successful career would be to get major wealthy collectors and be in a major museum collection. So, they’re object-makers, and even that they’re failing because they’re doing   th-century education for students who are trying to live in the 2 st. So that means they’re discipline-specific, which is a growing fallacy. With that European bias, the fine arts departments have developed into a sort of segmented teaching: we would teach line, we would teach form, we would teach color, we would teach rhythm, and the sum of it all would in the end be a perfect composition.... None of these things taught people what to say or how to say it or what was important to say. The only thing we did do well was self-expression. And so that became increasingly self-indulgent and bred these art-for-art’s-sake sort of notions.... It still did not leave you with the winning ticket to a creative approach.... Now we don’t even teach them craft: it’s conceptual. Like all the other problems with education, we’ve segmented things, we break it down and we don’t teach, treat the whole person. We’re not treating 
The Curriculum Project Report    September 2008 
them in a holistic way. We don’t look at what they bring to the table, what they have inherently in their history and their nature that could be incredibly powerful tools with which to act on the spring of the creative life.... I’m not talking about self-expression. I’m talking about what is the inherent nature of being a human being and treating ourselves as a whole, teaching the whole thing. So that is exactly why I had to do my undoing from all of my training when I came out of the university, precisely because I wanted to speak to my family, the people I grew up with. Bridging these differences is recognized as a worthy challenge, one that manifests in many different areas of institutional culture and custom. Some of the key aspects of this challenge are explored below. 
UNIVERSITY-COMMUNITY RELATIONSHIPS 
Many interviewees for this project find themselves caught up in a love-hate relationship between university and community. Ideally, the university embodies the application of artistic and intellectual power to improve society, which goes to the heart of CCD. Educators are community members and citizens as well as academics, and they can be important partners in positive social change. Practitioners value how much universities as repositories of knowledge have to offer and how badly they are needed. At the same time, they share many community members’ critiques of resource-rich and often self-involved institutions. They see the barriers that can constrain a reciprocal and mutually respectful relationship between university and community, that lock some higher educational programs into a too-narrow notion of teaching and learning and into power relations that skew towards the institution. As academics, participants understand the slowness and complexity of institutional culture, the obstacles that make it difficult for even the best-intentioned members of the university structure to act on their deepest desires for social justice; and at the same time, as activists, they understand community members’ frustration and impatience. By and large, the educators we interviewed and surveyed see themselves as agents of change, yet may feel their power to make change in their own institutions is severely limited: 
There’s something about the way that universities function that places theory before practice. And then there’s the problem that very often the universities themselves have been imperialist in communities. In [this city], the working-class Italian communities got knocked down to build [one university] and [another university] took over blocks of black neighborhoods, so the real estate issues around universities set up a bad dynamic with communities. I’m not trying to make a simple-minded case: university bad, community good. It’s much more complex than that. But we haven’t figured out good dynamics between academia and practice. The community work doesn’t get theorized enough, and then the theoretical academic work isn’t basically practiced enough. And so policy and research get disconnected from work experience, and community folks don’t theorize their own work. Yeah, there’s a failure to create praxis. 
Community agencies, their perception of publicly engaged scholarship is different than our articulated description. Their perception is that we have resources to give them. I’m helping them understand we do have resources, but our resources—at least in the work I do—are connected to active outcomes for our students. So we do have resources, and we do very much want to work on the community issues, but there have to be reciprocal outcomes for everyone. For us the outcome has to be a learning outcome of some kind. That can be developed to fit more with the social issues, but that’s what we are as an institution of higher ed. That’s something that needs to be constantly shared with our community partners in a way that they can begin to understand what it is we’re really saying we’re going to do, so that we all align our expectation and our visions about what this is going to be. 
That’s one of the obstacles I see: this kind of work is all relationship-based, and so you have to build relationships with students and faculty, with staff members on campus to help you facilitate things like fund transfers and paying people and all those kinds of things. And then you have to have similar relationships with community members, and relationships take a lot of time and they’re ever-changing. If you don’t have those as the foundation, things don’t often work very well. Universities are kind of structured to resist what needs doing here in terms of authentic relationships with communities. So, in view of some of the inertia and intransigence, you have 
The Curriculum Project Report  6 September 2008 
to build authentic alliances of networks as a way of rethinking and destabilizing some of that rigidity.... if the DNA of the university doesn’t have a disposition towards this sort of work, then we have to create a counterforce that moves its disposition. Often, we heard that CCD groups wanted collaborations with institutions of higher learning, but the best they had been able to achieve was entering into relationship with individual academics who were interested, sympathetic and willing to engage. Some feel exploited by university programs led by those who seem quite happy to take advantage of community programs without offering much in return: 
If you’re asking whether the relationship is equitable in terms of funding, no. We’ve always had to find our own funding; we’ve never been funded through higher ed. So let’s say, for example, the college students find using our facilities is wonderful, but we don’t get paid for it. They just use it, and we feel that that’s a service that we want to give because we want this information to get out. There is an informal relationship amongst us all [activists and professors]. I think they’ve learned a lot from our work and from communication with a lot of the international people. So they’re beginning to incorporate them into their programs and invite them. Or, for example, if we bring someone, they’ll invite them to [their campuses], so there is that relationship. But there isn’t a relationship where the university says, “Thank you for contributing, here’s a pot of money, or a grant.” That doesn’t exist. 
An institution this size is definitely difficult to partner with. It’s really hard to get your arms around the idea of the institution to begin with. Generally speaking, it’s partnerships with people but there’s a huge inequity and imbalance. 
What causes the distance between university and community? Is it a problem of scale in connecting large institutions with much smaller community groups, is it intrinsic to the educational system, is it imposed on colleges or co-created by them? One educator recognizes external pressures, yet sees universities as being led too much by their internal needs: 
There’s a lot of pressure on higher-education institutions, particular the universities, but I think that to a large extent academics have created the culture themselves. Higher-ed administrators have contributed substantially to developing these isolated, protected enclaves that really don’t want to talk to anybody outside of their small ivory tower... My experience in dealing with these people is that, sure, they will give lip service to a philosophy, and they may have a chancellor or somebody who gets up and gives a talk about how we’re all relatives, how we’re all connected and how the university needs to reach out to have a better understanding and how we need all of this stuff. But they only do it on their terms. They don’t listen to anybody, and that’s a problem. They will talk to industry if industry helps to push forward their research agenda and helps bring in more research dollars, or if there’s some other tangible sort of thing that’s going to advance some of their own interests, but in terms of actually really talking to communities, they don’t. I’m speaking very broadly, because there are individuals that you can talk to that are very sympathetic to the idea of really caring about community and in fact rebel against some of the more subtle quasi-authoritarian tendencies universities have. But in general, universities don’t really talk to the communities. 
As we spoke with thoughtful people who’ve been observing the field, they raised the question of whether the development of new academic programs always serves the communities CCD exists to support. Who benefits from the association of university and community? 
I am really interested in how we continually reevaluate the appropriate role of the academy within the field of community cultural development or community youth arts. What are we doing to strengthen the actual field that we are trying to train people for, not just strengthen our own institutions and our own academic programs? We need to always be in dialogue with people who are working in the field, whether they’re community partners or not, and we really need to listen to them about what the needs of the field are and how we might be able to serve those actual needs, possibly instead of our own—whatever is going to make our own institution more famous. You could get into this kind of honest dialogue with community partners and develop some level of trust. There is an articulation there of what role the academy could appropriately play. Maybe it 
The Curriculum Project Report  7 September 2008 
is a research role and maybe it is a training role, but we really need to listen to practitioners telling us what kinds of training people actually need that are going be of use. 
I tell my students, “Every time you think that only you are doing this, that this is you alone, you’re making a mistake.” That’s exactly what’s wrong with most programs. If the program is designed simply for the benefit of the student, then it doesn’t work—if the program doesn’t actually have a reciprocal thing for the community that goes back and forth between them, so that it benefits both sides, and that the larger vision is one that is an agreed-upon vision. That’s why [a particular] program fails: these graduate students have no relationship with the community they were teaching. Somehow there was a thought that education would give them an advantage that they could share with the community. But in fact, really they were being educated. They don’t respect other ways of knowing. So it’s a very, very basic problem. There isn’t one group empty, another one full. The teacher is not a purveyor of knowledge. You’re basically setting up a learning environment, and you are all in the process of learning together. 
RESPECTING DIFFERENT FORMS OF KNOWLEDGE 
A core principle of CCD is reciprocity, that all partners in the work give and receive over the life of a project or working relationship in a way that feels mutual, equal and respectful. Community cultural development work is conditioned on the notion that communities accumulate wisdom and resilience through experience, but that one obstacle to social change is a sense of internalized powerlessness that devalues this knowledge, impairing people’s ability to mobilize it in the service of their own aims. In contrast, higher education has often functioned as a sorting mechanism, elevating those with certified knowledge, providing an imprimatur and entrée. This is a critical question for CCD in higher education, as these educators explain: 
Institutions of higher education tend to have knowledge—we hope some wisdom, but quite often knowledge is the larger piece of what they’re bringing to the table. And the community folks, people who are practitioners, tend to have an awful lot of wisdom that may be supported by an underlying knowledge base or not. It depends on where you’re working and who you’re working with. You have to really have respect for all of those different types of knowledge. For me it’s all knowledge, and it’s learning how to listen for the wisdom that people are sharing with you, and that takes a little time. 
In the education system that we’re working in, you have a teacher, you have some sort of master, some person who has the knowledge and has a very rare duty to then teach everyone who doesn’t have the knowledge. My philosophy is that everybody in the room has the knowledge, whether it’s your first time in the room or whether you’ve been in the room 2  times. There’s something to be learned from everyone within the community. That’s not the way that our education system works; but when you’re talking about community-based work, it has to work from the standpoint that coming out of the school or coming from this institution, you are not the one who has all the answers. A part of the job is about sitting down and extracting the answers from the collective, because that’s where all the answers are. 
If you don’t empower people with their own knowledge, it doesn’t mean anything, because you have to know that you come with knowledge, your experience is knowledge. 
BREAKING DOWN THE SILOS 
Given the extent to which integrating CCD into higher education entails challenging longstanding customs and attitudes in academia, educators shared frustrations and dilemmas about how to go about this pioneering work, and even whether it is quixotic to try. 
The barriers and obstacles are many-faceted and worth thinking about. Universities are not structured to be permeable; so, in a sense, if not a gated community, we have our own metaphorically gated community in terms of our rules and structures and our ownership of our intellectual property. It is the way that we structure disciplines to the way that we make a very sharp division between scholarly and creative pursuits on the one hand, and teaching and education on the other hand.... We have real issues in knowing how to evaluate the quality of 
The Curriculum Project Report  8 September 2008 
this work of public scholarship, how to make sure that the right people are at the table doing the evaluation, and then that we’re rewarding it. There are also some very practical problems of calendars and transportation and sharing of financial resources and legal liability. All those issues are also there. They are, at one level, very important, and it is easy to underestimate their impact. At another level, they’re perhaps more soluble than the other issues that go to the heart of faculty and students’ disciplinary training. 
I’ve been here for years now, and I don’t understand where the levers of power and change are here. I just don’t understand it. All I can tell is that I get this sort of toxic smell from the few meetings I’ve gone to. It’s kind of like the academic senate where people argue incessantly and endlessly about how many angels can dance on the head of a pin. They just don’t seem to be able to get anything done. So it’s just not an inviting prospect to try to push stuff through that way. 
The obstacle is tradition, doing it the same old way. Comfort zones for people, comfort zones for administrators, tracks with accreditation people. We already have problems with them looking at our credential, having to be  8 hours in a particular subject and all this stuff that gets in the way of doing a more thorough job at preparing a student through a course of learning. But we’ve been able to figure out ways to manage the capacity that we have to make an impact on students. It’s with a lot of hard work and a lot of dedicated people both at the administrative level and at our level. But we’ve been able to, and the university has been willing to allow us to discover what we’re trying to work out. 
The irony is these programs are prestigious because they stand for something and they attract more creative people and they are more competitive to get into. Yet they are marginalized within academia.... So in order to build a really vibrant curriculum, it seems like it’s been all these gaps and political battles to keep these programs afloat. Then they’ve been consumed by these battles, that then graduate students come in, and I swear five generations of us students in my current program spent all our time being political activists to keep the programs alive when we could be spending our time learning or building scholarship or working with community. 
TIME AND SPACE RESTRICTIONS 
Universities are almost always organized around standardized units of time—semesters or quarters. Typically, students have a substantial summer break that usually takes them away from the campus community. In contrast, CCD projects evolve organically, sometimes through several successive iterations over a period of years. Funders and contracts may require breaking the work into distinct periods for planning purposes, but no one can predict at the outset when a project will be over. This challenge affects students, to be sure, but also the community groups students work with in what higher education calls field placements, community engagement or service-learning experiences. Sometimes the academic timeframe pushes for a premature result or conclusion, rather than respecting the work’s organic time; sometimes students are plucked out of a community relationship at semester’s end, leaving community members to feel used and abandoned. On the surface, considerations of time and space seem merely practical, but in a CCD framework, they also symbolize institutional control of community expression, as Kenyan writer Ngugi wa Thiong’o wrote: “the struggle for performance space is integral to the struggle for democratic space and social justice.”6 These interviewees are based in higher education: 
Many of these projects don’t fit neatly into our semester schedule because these social issues don’t. One of the mechanisms that helps the most is if there are flexible academic opportunities. So if students really are committed to a particular community project and they want to continue it, that they have an academic option to continue that, to get academic credit. And on the faculty side, that there’s some type of support for the faculty either, whether it’s release time, or some type of additional support for them so it really becomes a resource issue. Some faculty for a variety of different reasons are able to manage that because of whatever their curriculum requirements are and some just are not because of the program. So I don’t think there’s a one size fits all. 
The university’s not set up in terms of place or in terms of its schedule of truly collaborating with community-based organizations. Just to be clear about that; the semester works on a   -, 
6 TDR, Vol. 41, No. 3 (Autumn, 1997), pp. 29 
The Curriculum Project Report  9 September 2008 
  -week schedule and we have to begin and end a project in that amount of time. At a certain point there’s a great demand for the community-based partner to somehow become a resource for all these needy students who come to expect an archive is pre-made and prefabricated and just there for them to exploit. Nothing works that way. There are fundamental questions of trying to figure out what’s possible to do within a   -week schedule. 
I think breaking down the schedule and changing it so that it’s over a longer period of time would make a big difference. So if there were eight months as opposed to half that period of time, that would make a big difference. If the resources of the university were not simply for the classrooms and teachers and libraries, but also to partner organizations, and help with staffing so that substantial work can happen over eight months, that also gives you a very different picture. 
Community cultural development education is most complete where there is real continuity of relationship, producing deep learning, and most problematic where students are offered superficial placement experience and the larger community suffers the results. 
There’s some really good service-learning programs that are happening in liberal arts education—but a lot of what I’m seeing, particularly what I’m seeing at different conferences and symposiums, is that it tends to be more of the in-and-out: the student goes in, we do this good deed, we do it for a semester or a year, and then we’re out, and then we continue on with the rest of our education so that we can graduate. What I’m trying to produce in students is that it’s not an in-and-out process: it’s if you’re going to come do this work, this is life’s work. This is really about making sustainable change and making impacts that happen over a long period of time. I’m looking for the students that are saying things do need to change. I see my power as an artist in producing change and looking at issues around social justice and community development, and I want to see change happen. And that means it’s not a one-semester hit. 
We like to work with a community for several years, and we like to have the students working with us, apprenticing with us, because we’re the through-line. We don’t like to send students out to do “internships” or placements, because mostly we don’t feel that there’s enough, that the art can go deep enough, and that the relationships could go deep enough. The internship structure is based on a service paradigm and then because the students and the community groups are kind of using each other, there isn’t an overarching relationship where questions of power could be constantly looked at and made more transparent, and also, where genuine relationships can be developed. Of the artists and arts organization representatives completing the Curriculum Project survey, 42% had experience serving as community partners with a higher education–based program. Time considerations were among the most frequent answers to our question about what had been problematic: 
Coordinating with professors, working around class hours. They leave after short stays. 
Time and transportation. Not enough time in a semester to do history, interviews and create a project. 
Their terms end and we are left with a gap in employment. Taking time to train with our small staff.Time: we needed more on the front end and the back end to get more out of the engagement. 
At some institutions a degree of continuity and flexibility has been possible, suggesting that over time, others will follow suit. For instance, at Columbia College Chicago, students in the Arts in Youth and Community Development concentration of the Masters in Arts Management have a four-semester intensive practicum in which they work up to 20 hours a week in a community-based youth arts organization. This usually unfolds as a year and a half of work with one organization, bridging a summer. But for now, this approach is exceptional. As noted in the summary of survey responses in the previous section under “Deepening Community Engagement,” time restrictions are a common and frustrating complaint. 
The Curriculum Project Report  0 September 2008 
FACULTY QUALIFICATIONS 
Throughout Curriculum Project research, participants told us that too often, faculty members in newly emergent programs lack adequate depth of direct experience in community cultural development. 
There just aren’t that many people who have both field experience and are inside the field and are in academic positions or higher education. 
I think universities are great place for people to get the training if the institutions have committed to faculty. Like how many calls a month do you get? It’s got to be more than me, from people who are teaching the first community-based course that their school has ever taught, and they want to know what they should teach, and what should they read and how should they teach it. I’m glad those classes are being taught, but a place that’s really offering focused training should gather faculty from the rich field of practitioners that exist. A bunch of them could desperately use the insurance and the ongoing salary. 
For the most part, I see people talking about or teaching “community” education with little or no direct experience, other than academics. This is not helpful, as direct experience, I believe, is the only way to impart this type of information. Some have suggested this is a systemic problem for any field ripening into academia, as noted earlier, a predictable point on a familiar developmental trajectory: 
That’s going to happen with any emergent field, because the institutions do not see it as an investment yet. I had to literally launch an all-out campaign to get my administration to finally agree to hiring several people out of one search. But I knew that it was an opportunity because of the pool that I had generated, and it was an opportunity to really make a statement within higher ed that yes, there is a place for tenured faculty to do this kind of work. And hopefully because of the work that will come out of them, other institutions will see that as a worthy investment. But at its most serious, the problem can go beyond qualification for the task to a lack of respect for it, which the second speaker believes to be grounded in art-world snobbery: 
[My program] started in an already existing arts management program that has faculty with no background in community cultural development. It just was never a requirement, it was never anything anyone asked about. In my ideal world, our students would be learning accounting from somebody who had some idea of how a small community-based organization worked, not just how like Disney works. That might change over time, but it’s not the way it is now, and so it’s a little bit of a disconnect. They have some strong faculty that really are professionals in the community arts field, that have worked in the field for a long time, who really know the score, but they’re also taking classes from people who not only don’t even understand anything about their field, but don’t necessarily even have what they would feel like is respect for their field. It’s really challenging. 
One problem that’s still just enormous is that the professional art world—especially the upper echelon of the professional world—continues to turn their back on this stuff pretty consistently. And if they have programs, the programs are connected to the professional side of the organization very skimpily. So you might have a professional theatre company that has a community arts program, but it’s run by an entirely separate staff, and there’s never any overlap between who’s doing work in the community and who’s on stage, hardly ever. 
As the following comments suggest, in a field that has no special love of credentials, a practical obstacle in many academic settings is the requirement of a terminal degree. Most expert practitioners have gained stature through on-the-job training, a form of preparation which the university may not value. As these speakers point out, it is difficult—sometimes impossible—to surmount this obstacle: 
We had some adjuncts who were really great and they were community organizers and activists, but most of them do not have Ph.D.’s. As we hired the Ph.D.’s, they’re great Ph.D.’s in the academic sense, but their commitment to the same kind of community-based work and all these other things was different. Their investments were different. [With the adjuncts,] students were getting the best education they could have gotten. The university on the one hand has a limit as to the role that adjuncts can play, but also as we began making the case that a lot of 
The Curriculum Project Report    September 2008 
these adjuncts were lawyers and filmmakers and poets who won national awards [abroad] and all these things were as good if not better. But as far as they were concerned, unless they have the credential, they cannot be part of the pool of possible candidates for the jobs. It’s a typical limit. 
I would love to have other people come to the university as professionals or as teachers or whatever you want to call it, even in a nice reciprocal way that someone who is not a “doctor of whatever,” but has more information and knowledge than I could ever have, to come in and be able to teach with me or with the students. 
Several research participants mentioned Imagining America’s Tenure Team Initiative (TTI), referenced earlier, as well as other efforts to legitimate public scholarship and community engagement as valid work toward academic employment and tenure for practitioners. The TTI report suggests that universities value community engagement in promoting publicly engaged scholars: 
Developing protocols to advance public artists and scholars to full professor rank should encourage retention, develop faculty leaders, and test policies for evaluating public scholarship and creative work in a less risky atmosphere than that surrounding tenure decisions.7 
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT 
Community cultural development practitioners see the relationship with community members as primary and sacrosanct: every aspect of the work is grounded in a collaborative, reciprocal, mutually respectful working relationship, which takes time and effort. In effect CCD relies on one-at-a-time relationship-building, without shortcuts. Although individual faculty members and even whole departments may respect these values, as noted earlier, universities often have vexed relationships with the surrounding community. Whatever the causes, it can be slow going to foster real meetings and real goodwill between higher educational institutions and community-based organizations, and this can affect community engagement opportunities for students. 
In recent years, many higher educational institutions have become more engaged in service-learning, defined as follows by Campus Compact (a national nonprofit organization founded in 1985 and dedicated to promoting community service, civic engagement, and service-learning in higher education): “Service-learning incorporates community work into the curriculum, giving students real-world learning experiences that enhance their academic learning while providing a tangible benefit for the community.” Wherever service-learning is understood as conditioned on equal partnerships, it can be strongly compatible with CCD values. Where it is not—where it is unidirectional, like serving in a soup-kitchen—real community engagement can be watered down to little more than field experience or extra credit for students, without much regard for its larger impact. Several educators expressed concern: 
In many places, there’s this huge emphasis on community service-learning. In many places, there’s such an emphasis on drawing students into this, that there’s a de-emphasis on social justice work and on really critical analysis. The point is to send people out and give them experiences, and that by itself sometimes doesn’t work well because of inadequate training, and it doesn’t work well because there’s no real reflection from a social-justice point of view. 
As faculty, we’re certainly supported. We get sometimes internal university grants, sometimes we’ve gotten some development assistance from our dean. There is a general positive regard for the work among many of our colleagues, both in arts and in liberal arts. What hasn’t translated yet is things like graduate assistantships or other kinds of infrastructure needs. And so, often when we’re going for external funding, we’re going for operating expenses for those kinds of things, for administrative coordinators and those kinds of things, so we don’t have that and we need it sorely. And to my mind that would certainly help the program develop much more quickly. I think that we’re lagging behind some other programs who have that kind of administrative support. Those programs tend to be more internship-oriented programs that are getting support from centers based at their universities like community partnership offices. When it’s understood as service within that model, the universities pay up. Oddly, when it’s understood as research, which is the model we’re working with, you’re on your own to do the fundraising. I think it’s actually skewing the field in a way: university public relations, it is definitely a feather in their cap to have these 
7 Scholarship in Public: Knowledge Creation and Tenure Policy in the Engaged University, p. 3. 
The Curriculum Project Report  2 September 2008 
things happening, so they’ll give infrastructure support to that. But I think we sacrifice something in the field when that proliferates. The academic frame can also limit the degree of genuine community participation in higher education– related projects. This speaker is reflecting on Ph.D. requirements in an allied department: 
A lot of students end up doing like a quasi-participatory community-based project where they bring folks together to analyze a topic. You know, they bring in parents in a school community to talk about how they would change the school, and that parent group lives for that life of that student’s doctorial dissertation. The student still theorizes and writes up the dissertation, because that’s the way it’s got to be written, so it’s not in the voices of the participants. And the Ph.D. goes on to get jobs because the community-based work is marketable in academia, but you can’t do it fully.... That’s not to say we can’t change things around where from point one you don’t have to do three position papers, you have to do three big stakeholder meetings instead. But I think you’d have to change more than just the kind of project you can do. You’d have to change a lot of these requirements and benchmarks for the Ph.D. You know: is this objective, is this scientific? You have to go through the process of scientific discovery and have certain kinds of data and categorize your data in a certain way. What is the whole scientific method, what is scientific research and how is it theorized would be a critique. Often, there are also gaps between students’ own experience and knowledge and the community groups engaged in partnering with higher-education programs. Several participants talked about the need to recognize this in aid either of bridging the two, or of redefining community engagement to bring it in line with the field’s deepest challenges. 
One of the things that happens is with white students in a community like [this one] and with the ways that race and class are configured in the field, that the student’s going to come in and it’s a kind of a touristic relationship. Many of my well-meaning white students come from very segregated white communities, and they come [here] because they really want to figure something out about racism, and they really want to be around communities of color. That’s great, and I think there’s roles that they can play there. But if the community arts field is then just tilted toward lots of white young artists trying to figure out what to do with communities of color, then we’re stifling something in terms of what they could be doing with their communities of origin. I think that’s really where a hundred flowers could flourish. 
If we’re looking at apprenticeship and we’re looking at the community-based, arts-based community development, then the best place to start is in your own community. That’s the place that you know the best. For instance, this morning [at an event] about six or seven people came up to us and introduced themselves. “Where are you from?” “We’re from Boston” or ”We’re from Massachusetts” or “We’re from Vermont,” or Maine, or somewhere—people coming in very much like the civil rights movement, coming in from the north to learn from the people in the communities that are still being the hardest hit. Study those things and then they’re gone. But where are our people that are being educated? Where are they studying, what communities are they getting involved in and what are they doing to put back into where they come from? So I think when we’re talking about community development, it has to start in our own communities, 
CURRICULUM REQUIREMENTS AND IMBALANCES 
As noted earlier, most current CCD courses and programs are attached to arts departments, some having been grafted onto existing majors with their pre-existing requirements. CCD students may be expected to spend as many hours in studio courses in particular art forms as fellow students studying to be gallery artists or professional actors in mainstream theatre or cinema. Faculty members consistently report how difficult it is to win approval for new courses—and how much more so to drop prior requirements or add alternative tracks to make room for new studies. Some of our higher-education interviewees explained how these imbalances have skewed their own programs. Inherent in their remarks is the sense that at the moment, they feel they can do little to address the problem: 
The Curriculum Project Report    September 2008 
These institutions are rarely set up in ways that accommodate us. The way that you’re expected to work and speak in these institutions rarely accommodates what it takes to do this kind of work well, and therein is this difficulty. As much as institutions of higher learning are desperately seeking something to break down their silos and their disciplines and their requirements, in fact, the entrenched divisions are so strong on campuses, it’s very, very hard to do that. And that entrenchment isn’t all negative. Say you’re in the dance program, and they are trying to make dancers, it does take a lot of time, and there aren’t a lot of hours left over. I see a lack of awareness that’s been going on forever about how community-based practices could inform artistic life and how that could really change the requirements. 
I’m glad that this is a graduate program, and I’m glad that we can be pretty selective, because we cannot afford to admit anyone to our program who does not come with a certain level of social competence, economic awareness, awareness of race, class, gender. They have to already come like that, because there’s nothing in our program that really prepares that. We don’t have that in our curriculum. If I could offer it, I really would. 
By the time each of the disciplines has taken their students through their requirements, there is no time for interdisciplinary work. And that’s just in the arts. Looking beyond the arts on campus, or beyond the campus into the community, that’s my concern. The disciplines have such a stranglehold on the requirements, and the university calendar is the system by which courses are established and the means by which you can do some of this innovative sharing. It gets deadly. I don’t know what’s going to change that, but it’s almost like you’d want to start them with a separate program and just say, “Here’s four years and here’s how we’re going to do it, and you can take one course a semester in English or Science.” Almost reverse it. It’s really sad. 
PREPARATION FOR LIVELIHOOD 
The U.S. community cultural development field has been perpetually starved for resources. Most funders active in the field tend to come and go, trying one type of initiative for a few years, then moving on to something else. Because it can be difficult to secure university investment in new programs, educators told us they were forced to seek outside funding even for basic expenses, often putting them in competition with other educators and practitioners: 
I hate it, but we’re dependent on these foundations. Luckily there’s a Cummings, and there’s a couple of other very progressive foundations that can see it, but it’s hard. There is a very tight spot about that question of functioning within capitalism. We are functioning in that economy, it does become proprietary, and I think we actually have to forgive ourselves for when it happens, but we have to be honest about what those dynamics are when they’re happening. I don’t know how we can really interrogate what it is to be in this economy that is grant-funded and that’s what allows things to happen. It’s an activism that I think is happening more and more where owning class institutions can determine when people get to talk to each other and about what. It’s a very odd activism. It scares me. Indeed, many practitioners are frightened by the steady decline in funds for community cultural development work: 
I think we’re in danger. I know that the groups that we’ve been organizing with are all feeling the same thing—that our institutions are in danger. Our funding is less and less, and if it remains static, which ours has, it means that we’re in a deficit, because the cost of living, of everything, has gone up. Even if you get the same amount of funding, you’re functioning basically with less. As CCD programs take root in higher education, the general scarcity of resources has implications for academia. Although some of the field’s long-lived flagship organizations have been able to secure ongoing grants through diligent effort and the cultivation of relationships with funders, there have been no programs of general operating support comparable to the annual revenue grants available to CCD groups in other countries through national and regional public agencies. So job prospects are very different from those in fields with more stable financing (e.g., not all newly graduated lawyers will get wonderful jobs, but there is a steady stream of opportunities for recent graduates). There are some entry-level jobs in existing CCD 
The Curriculum Project Report    September 2008 
organizations, some opportunities to sell schools, prisons, hospitals and other social institutions on employing CCD practitioners, and some potential entrepreneurial opportunities for free-lancers. But questions persist: are programs preparing people for jobs that ought to exist, but don’t as yet? Is higher education’s knowledge and creativity being brought to the challenge of expanding CCD employment? 
To the extent that CCD education is preparing students to earn a living, it may be that the academic field’s ultimate success or failure is tied to conditions beyond the academy. What would it take to create more jobs in the field? In other regions of the world, public entities are the major sponsors of community cultural development work: throughout Europe, for instance, municipalities and neighborhoods employ community arts officers whose task it is to plan and coordinate program offerings for that area. In the developing world, educational and aid agencies employ community artists to engage people in envisioning and directing local community development efforts, or to take part in public campaigns such as health promotion. In a market economy, though, with public funding flat or shrinking and few private foundations involved in supporting CCD, economic insecurities may conflict with an interest in this work. 
Is professionalization being imposed from outside the field? Is it raising income expectations beyond supportable levels? Is it channeling resources away from already hard-pressed community-based cultural organizations? From the broadest perspective, is it a good thing? 
They always want to know how much money can I earn? And I had a heartbreak. I had a teaching artist that came to me who was really extraordinary, and I hired her to be an associate director, and she worked with me for years. And she said to me, “Is this as much as I’m going to make?” and I said, “Yeah, around this, around $ 0,000. It’s what you are going to make in this area,” and I said, “You’re probably doing very well.” And she said, “Well, I have to go.” She’s doing corporate training. 
What I’m noticing from our students who are graduating is that—maybe because they’ve just spent a lot of money on a Master’s degree—they cannot accept jobs at community arts organizations for 2  grand a year. They’re not working there. There are not that many jobs in the field, you know, people aren’t moving. I’ve seen a lot of the pressure for this whole professionalization also comes from the foundation world, because the foundation world increasingly wants staff members of community arts organizations or community organizations in general to have credentials.... And what are your credentials, like is it good enough to say that this is a person who grew up in the organization? I definitely think that pressure exists. Whether we’re responding to that pressure or contributing to it, I don’t know. Maybe both. 
One of the issues that I hear from funders as I talk a little about teaching artists is, “Well, don’t you think there needs to be some sort of certification so that we know these people are competent?” There are a lot of funders whose model is the school model: the teachers can’t stand in front of a classroom full of kids in a public school unless the state has certified that they’ve taken the appropriate classes and passed them and have appropriate practical experiences to be teachers in a school. When we talk to the teaching artists about that, they get out the garlic and crucifixes. And that’s a tension, I think, because if you want to expand the field, the opportunities that people have in it, they have to expand on it by orders of magnitude, the opportunities that are available for work in it. We’ve got to engage big systems like the schools or YMCAs and Boys and Girls Clubs. We’ve got to engage big systems and institutions in the work, and we are concerned about this certification business. One of the things that makes [this study] so important is because it strikes me that if we don’t define meaningful standards for this field, they will. 
I can’t imagine a way to really know what the values are behind a certification, and so even if you get a piece of paper that says that somebody certified you, you’re not getting what the values are behind it, who the people were who were making that. It means nothing for me in terms of knowing that somebody’s going to be good in doing the work. Another reason against it is that not everybody who can do really good work is going to go that route, so you’re just leaving people out. I do want training to include all the skill stuff, but just like with any good work, the essential thing is something else. And that something else can develop in a whole lot of different ways, and that something else is a certain kind of heart and intelligence and commitment and curiosity and a million other things. It’s hard because we’re living in the world that we’re living in, 
The Curriculum Project Report    September 2008 
where everything has to be measured in a certain way. But the true heart of doing this work is not measurable in those ways, and it’s not efficient in those ways. In recent years, members of the CCD field have observed the growing popularity of the term “teaching artist” to describe a type of work that often overlaps with community cultural development. Most teaching artists work in classrooms, but some operate in other types of social institutions—community centers, medical facilities, prisons. As distinct from art teachers, their core expertise is in one or more art forms (rather than education per se). Social-justice motivations are not necessarily at the heart of their work, though for some teaching artists, they may be powerful and integral. As arts classes fall by the wayside in an era of test-driven primary and secondary education typified by No Child Left Behind, some communities find resources to bring teaching artists into the classroom to fill the void. In short, “teaching artist” has come to describe a viable job prospect for a growing number of arts students, as this interviewee described: 
Young artists, and particularly artists in art school, are really feeling pretty isolated and alienated. You know, there aren’t too many options when you get out of art school to make your own work and somehow survive. I think that the options that do exist are kind of unappealing to a lot of younger artists. So they find out through whatever means that you can practice your art in a context in which you’re also contributing in some moral, less explicit way, making some sort of what people view as a social contribution. I think that a lot of people these days who are of college age think about teaching and education as a way of giving back or participating socially. But also, doing those things is their way of practicing your work in some kind of collective context, or drawing on some kind of collective experience for your own work. When they think about the fact or hear about the fact that you can at least make part of a living, however meager, from doing that, it’s not only exciting, but kind of a relief. At least that’s been my experience talking to kids who come in college—or at other places around here or even to high school students—who are looking forward to being artists of some kind that are concerned about how they’re going to make that work. And when they see or hear about what teaching artists do, it suddenly makes a lot of sense as something to do. But I don’t think it’s any mystery that one of the other main reasons why teaching artistry is suddenly all the rage, even though it’s been around probably since the dawn of humanity’s art-making, is because the arts along with everything else have been ripped wholesale out of the public schools and pretty much everywhere else where young people used to experience them. There’s some sense that this is not really a good thing, at least not to the degree that it happened, and that some things should probably be done about it. 
The Curriculum Project Report  6 September 2008 
SeCTion 5: SuSTAinAble eduCATion for CCd 
Despite the challenges described in the previous section, many participants in this research see the ripening of CCD into academic viability as a certainty: as people continue to carry out and document excellent work, as it becomes clear that cultural development is an essential focus for both community and university in these times, community cultural development practices and principles will infuse even conventional arts training: 
I think it’s happening. How can we continue to have it happen, that it becomes an indispensable part of any serious program, that community development work has to be part of any serious theatre program, because it is a vibrant way in which people are working in our field and it must be studied? 
The key question driving this research is one of cultivation. What is the best way to nurture the ripening crop of CCD programs to ensure that they thrive and yield their full potential? People are ready to talk about this: 
What are the mechanisms by which we can spread the word and spread the study more? That’s what interests me. What about training teachers to be able to teach this work? Can anybody teach this work who hasn’t done that as a practitioner? This is a question we ask but boy, what I would love to do is to just jam, jam, jam on what are specific mechanisms for getting it out there. Of course, then there will be the purists saying it’s watered down if it’s taught by this person or if it’s taught in this way. But I believe the movement is important enough and vibrant enough that for me, it’s an all of the above. I think that there should be hardcore practitioners and specialists who are teaching it, but I absolutely think if it starts popping up in places where one would not expect it to pop up, I feel like that’s all to the good. 
The field is diverse, encompassing many different artistic practices and cultural vocabularies, many different approaches to coursework, community engagement and credentialing. Reviewing the great quantity of thoughtful, earnest and creative reflection and analysis participants contributed to this study, the Curriculum Project team concluded that rather than attempting to assert models or “best practices” in community cultural development education, it would be most useful and consonant with the field’s own culture to propose values and guidelines that might inform anyone striving for excellence. Below, participants’ ideas are summarized and discussed, and in the final section, guiding aims, values and principles are proposed. 
NURTURING THE FIELD 
Survey respondents were asked to say what is most needed to support and improve community cultural development education, checking multiple answers if they wished. Here is what they told us: 
More funding 81% Peer-to-peer networking 70% More flexibility in scheduling community work (e.g., project rather than course-focused) 
66% 
Small regional or topical meetings 58% More opportunities for graduates to practice what they have learned 56% Support for consultation from experts in the field 51% More support from academic decision-makers 48% More legitimacy as social change work 46% More outlets for writing and documentation 45% More logistical support in community engagement (e.g., transportation) 42% More art-world legitimacy 41% National conferences 31% 
“More funding” was the leading choice within each of the individual surveys, as well as in the aggregated results. This answer speaks for itself, and if it doesn’t speak loudly enough, the many testimonies to scarcity 
The Curriculum Project Report  7 September 2008 
of resources throughout this report should amplify it sufficiently. In the context of The Curriculum Project, one point was underscored repeatedly: that higher educational institutions must invest their own resources— space, time, faculty—in CCD programs to ensure their success and to demonstrate to external funders that they are really on board with these programs, and not just seeking a new revenue stream. 
Other popular choices also reflect the findings discussed in previous sections of this report, such as “more flexibility in scheduling community work,” treated under “Time Restrictions” in the previous section. Below, specific ideas to nurture the field are discussed, augmented by quotations from interviewees. 
CRITICAL DISCOURSE: MEETINGS, CONFERENCES AND PUBLICATIONS 
Many participants in this study expressed appreciation for the opportunity to talk about the questions we raised, saying they wanted more reflection and more opportunities for dialogue, such as retreats. As with survey respondents, there wasn’t a great deal of interest in major conferences, which were seen to have a low cost-benefit ratio, but appetites were avid for sustained face-to-face dialogues on a manageable scale, dialogues shaped by participants and not bound by the conventions of academic discourse: 
I think people need to be away from their place, it needs to be a place where people are fed well, they get a nice comfortable bed. There’s drink. Even just a few weekends in a row or ten days—two weekends and the five days in between—can make all the difference in the world for somebody. I think I would take a dialogical approach in trying to figure out how to formulate it. Once you have a group of people in mind, then you begin to formulate it out of that actual group and see where they’re at, what their needs are, and then think about spaces that are created, films to show, an essay to read—nothing long, but an essay to read that would just open things up, just trying to open spaces up, release all those things that people want to talk about that usually feel too pressed to be able to deal with and unpack. I think that’s why food is important; it’s why music is important. All these things help to unleash...so it can’t be simply textual, it can’t be privileging an academic mode of discourse, it has to be using all the senses, because that’s where community-based organizations really are, using all the senses. 
To enter into dialogue with people in the wider field, I think would be absolutely essential. I’m aware of and I have been an attendee of conferences such as the Pedagogy of the Oppressed Conference, specific educational theatre conferences like ATHE, but I think moving into relation with people in the broader sphere of community arts, that would be enormously useful. And then there’s the more pragmatic reason in terms of making connections and opening up possibilities for students to visit and see other examples of practice, etcetera. 
When dialogue goes through the filter of everyone’s going to write something, and then they’re going to peer-review each others’ things, it gets so removed from actually what we’re doing. And for these kinds of issues, I just want to talk to people about what my closest peer colleagues are doing and coming up against. That’s really what I need to do. What are you doing? And how are you doing that? I want more community-based models of story circles and those kinds of structures that are much more responsive and immediate. 
Given the premium on people’s time—often overwhelming responsibilities come packaged with too-scarce time and other resources—they want such encounters to yield maximum value: 
I’ve been part of things where you have the opportunity to come together, and you go really deep, and there’s a lot of dialogue, but there’s no action plan afterwards. I think it’s a real challenging part of that, because it’s great to have that time to really go deep into issues, and I think we don’t have that enough, where we’re able to come together with like minds and to really have that type of discourse. But what is missing from that is when there isn’t the next step. So we have these great discussions, we have all of this wonderful information that is produced, and then we go back to our institution and we’re back in the grind, and it’s like, okay, so what changes as a result of that? So I think institutes are good, but there needs to be implementation money for something to actually come out of it. 
An abiding complaint among CCD practitioners is the scarcity of constructive criticism that respects the field’s values and emerges from the wish to improve practice. Every practitioner who engages in projects 
The Curriculum Project Report  8 September 2008 
that feature public events (such as staged performances, screenings or exhibits) has faced the discouraging experience of being publicly judged by a critic whose entire frame of reference comes from very different practices. Liz Lerman’s “Critical Response Process” has been adopted by some practitioners as a compatible framework for criticism. Perhaps because of a widespread perception of the field’s fragility, there hasn’t been much writing along these lines, and apart from relationships fostered between individual practitioners or companies, not much face-to-face dialogue of this type. This educator looks to other academic fields for examples of the type of discourse needed: 
I look at American Studies, ethnic studies programs. Sometimes I find institutions that are doing really engaging work in communities coming out of sociology or political science. That’s one thing that we’re able to ascertain as we’re going to different committee meetings and symposia and conferences. You can tell by people’s presentations what work is engaging. I think even being able to critique presenters that are doing fabulous work, but it’s missionary work—it’s more to the benefit of the students than for the community that you’re working with, as with a faculty member who might not realize it, but isn’t thinking beyond, “I’m taking my students to South Africa every year and it was this great project.” And then when you really start to look at it, what is the project, and what are they getting out of it, and what’s the impact, and what’s the sustainability? And being able to have that, the discourse with the faculty saying, “Oh my, I am doing missionary work!” 
ONE-TO-ONE LEARNING: MENTORS AND CONSULTANTS 
As noted earlier, most participants in this research, even those with advanced degrees, indicated that their own skills in CCD had been self-taught or acquired via some type of apprenticeship. The underlying truth is that the best education for community cultural development addresses the whole person, values relationship and cannot be entirely contained by a limited-term course, a semester or even a multi-year program. Lifelong learning is the hallmark of the most committed and respected practitioners. This speaker is a practitioner and educator: 
The most essential thing to me is that you really look at training as something that’s going on completely over time, all the time. That’s the essential thing, that’s the number one thing I’d say. A commitment to space in the design of a program for asking questions of the work, the questions that even go to places like value, but certainly cause and effect. I think a lot of places don’t necessarily have that. 
One thing that participants looked for, therefore, was a way to build mentorship—deep, reciprocal relationship with a senior practitioner—into CCD in higher education, for example: 
The people of the university are the most visionary and most committed to this, and they believe it and they understand it and they will give students creative license to do this work. If it’s in geography, environmental science, the arts, bring them all together, and guarantee that at least the students will get one of these people as a mentor or advisor and someone who will buy into their work. So, maybe [the way to design a program] would be interdisciplinary, a hub, it might float somewhere, it might have a home, it might not. But it has commitment and buy-in from people who really like to work interdisciplinary naturally in their own work, they work this way and believe in it. One of the biggest problems in grad school is finding an inspired mentor who will believe in your work. Once you have that, I think a lot of these barriers kind of dissipate. 
The first year really does have to be apprenticeship, and I like this apprentice thing because I want them to learn humility. I like the apprentice model, I’ve been an apprentice. It was really some of the most wonderful period of my life, to be an apprentice who washed the brushes. To be the one who couldn’t make the mark. When I could make the mark, it was incredible, because I earned my place on the scaffold. I think of that now, for my students, when I’m watching them go through the process. The idea of mentorship extended beyond degree programs too. More than half of survey respondents indicated that support for consultation from experts in the field was a priority. Some pointed out that given the goodwill and enthusiasm of people in the field, it could be done with relative ease (though perhaps not so inexpensively as thirty years ago): 
The Curriculum Project Report  9 September 2008 
I did consultations with community colleges for a long time for NEH in the Carter years, and every small community college has some amazing people who are not alone, they have colleagues, and the colleagues organize good work and do things. I loved it. I was able to go in and listen to the faculty who had written the grant and then especially interaction with the faculty who were engaged and adventuresome and looking for social-justice work. I didn’t even have to do that, it could be people who were really engaged as teachers and I would find ways to reinforce that. We were paid $  0 a day or $200 a day or something and travel expenses. People who do the work that you and I and so many great people do have to go to places where people are kind of starting out, or where people even have an idea. That would be a great thing, if it could be financed even for awhile. It would seed so much good work. 
FRESH MODELS 
We asked interviewees to describe the ideal CCD education, the sequence, balance and shape of a program that would address what they perceived as shortcomings in current offerings and embody all that they found essential. Answers differed in significant respects, but they had a great deal in common. Five points stood out as especially characteristic, fresh and suggestive. 
first, there was considerable interest in combining study and practice, so that a close cohort of students learn together and apply what they learn to another realm of knowledge within the university before moving out into broader community engagement: 
I was thinking in terms of the college curriculum that maybe, for example, I might spend a semester giving them the tools that I’ve spent thirty years developing and then I might say, “Now I want you to take these tools and in the second semester, apply them to some other subject matter that you’re already doing on campus, whether it’s science or social science. Pick one of your courses—I don’t care which one—and you’re going to spend the whole semester learning how to apply these things to something else.” And then maybe I would trust them in communities. Meanwhile, maybe there’d be another semester where you’re working on the tools that have been uncovered so far for working in the community, and then you could actually go into communities and spend some time working together and developing that, the give and take, absorb difference, live in disagreement, embrace paradox and all that stuff. 
When a student comes in, they don’t necessarily immediately theorize, “This is what I want to do, and this is a project that I want to develop in the community,” but there’s almost a menu of issues, themes of the year or maybe even themes for every four years, themes for every cohort that goes through. When you start, and even apply, it’s this cohort is going to look at the arts and environmental justice, and that’s something that this collaborative committee has decided is a pressing issue and radically interesting and a topic that people are talking about, and so then that whole cohort focuses on different realms of that issue. 
We will be bringing in a cohort of people who are interested in global warming. And they will be dancers, musicians, whatever. They probably will be interdisciplinary, looking at an approach to how they will create a project, the graduate thesis based on applying multiple disciplines to the concept and setting goals for them. The first year is pretty much apprenticing with someone else in the field. What I’m hoping to do is to allow for these people to be mentored by various people. The focus is always the same, it’s project-based, it’s learner-centered, it’s diversity-driven, it’s driven by what the art work is to achieve and it’s measured by that. So, we’re completely taking away the very essence of the valuing of the art that is currently in the system. In other words, you’re not going to take one of these pieces and evaluate it as a piece. It is going to be a piece that’s going to be evaluated by its relationship to the public, it’s carrying out the goals that students set for themselves, which might be changing the world. Or it might be simply lowering the carbon footprint in one neighborhood. But the measurement will be, “Is this the effective way to approach this?” and we’ll create a cohort of people who will come together in a low-residency program. 
Second, there was interest in bridging community cultural development out of arts departments, developing programs based on the reality that practitioners come either from an arts interest or a community organizing interest, converging in CCd: 
The Curriculum Project Report  0 September 2008 
In an ideal curriculum, a Master’s program, you can enter in one of two tracks. You can enter with a bunch of experience as a theatre artist interested in moving more into the community related fields. Or you can enter as a community worker without a lot of arts experience, more interested in entering into the theatre practice in relation to your work. Whatever one of those two streams you’re in, there is a fairly intensive screening/application process. And if you’re coming from the theatre place, great, you better be really solid there, and then the screening and application process is about who you are and your values and your goals and why you want to move into this kind of work. If you’re coming from community work but not arts, great, you have a really strong background in that community work and a real willingness in the basic body, voice, mind and heart to move into this theatre practice. And then those two streams in the program happen parallel to a certain point and also cross over in certain ways, and the third year is completely together. Third, deep and sustained community work was essential to most of these ideal visions. The people who offered them focused on reciprocity and permeability, on engaging the whole person, embedding their imagined programs in a matrix of relationship: 
The ideal program would first of all have to recognize a really wide range of aesthetics. If we’re going to talk about work that engages with communities, the aesthetics of practice are really, really important: to not just be replicating at a poorer level something that people don’t have access to, but really finding the artistic catalyst behind this creative work. There’s a really wide range of practice, and the narrowness of not having enough inclusion limits those artistic possibilities, because we aren’t engaging with contemporary indigenous practitioners, not being represented by somebody else who’s worked with them for twenty years, but having them speak for themselves. So aesthetics would be the first thing I would imagine as the core. And then I think accessibility of the curriculum, that methodology and context and history be accessible on many different levels. If it’s about communities, then communities should be able to access and use this material, should be able to get into an archive or should be able to have handbooks or methodologies, pedagogies that are practicum. And then also scholars who are involved with academic theory and acting theory and directing theory should also be generating materials that enter into those discussions. Archiving is part of this, you know a lot of this work disappears. Regeneration is really important. When you work with the community, you’re working with at-risk youth and people, you have to be there, and I think that can cause an extreme amount of burnout, personal burnout or just really stale artistic ideas. Ideally, how does it become also something that is spiritually renewing and physically renewing? Also, academic standards of qualification would need to change, because there are so many people who are absolute crap who have academic appointments, and there are people who are unbelievably great public intellectuals and artists who are in this serfdom of teaching as lecturers or instructors and never can get promoted. 
Ideally, we would understand the program as community artists-in-residence and we would understand our faculty positions like that. You would essentially be able to develop kind of a company-in-residence and have the technical resources and the personnel to be doing that—in my field, it would mean I would have a technical director and administrators, so that we could function as a company. I don’t know that we would necessarily want that space on campus. We might, but it would be more people who were trained in site-specific technical stuff, so we could go out and be on location over a couple of years and have the capacity to do that. I think if we were a department, we would have a scholar/academic person, we would have a technical director in performance, a technical director in digital and visual media, and then someone to be nurturing those relationships: in all the projects we have that kind of position, a community coordinator who is on it with scheduling or orchestrating interviews or coordinating when we’re working with after-school programs, all the church and service work, partnering with them. Those kinds of roles are really different than the internship service model. And it means that living there as an artist for a period of time, that we would have the capacity to have those kind of residencies in community or organizations that are very different than the internship model. We would be able to develop those kinds of relationships and just do them as an aggregate. Like, you’d have a few students who are the artists-in-residence at a school or a social service organization, and able to 
The Curriculum Project Report    September 2008 
develop something in their own terms, not just leave it to interns to do service. If you put artists there or a group of artists, what could happen? We would get to pioneer those approaches in different kinds of communities. fourth, elements of ideal curriculum were far-ranging and various. The types of knowledge research participants said were needed would require drawing on the resources of many different specialties within higher education as well as learning how to be present and kind and treat others with full dignity: 
The basic skills are organizing, power analysis, facilitation, understanding how communities come to be, some basic sociology, social networks. Basic things about how communities form and the nature of them. For me it would be like anthropology, it would be a combination of understanding communities, certainly understanding whatever art forms you want to do in them, and then basic skills and facilitating and organizing. 
The art world overemphasized the personal to the extent that nothing else mattered. I don’t want to throw the baby out with the bathwater, I think that one needs to have an individual mind. And then there’s all the other stuff about learning how to work in relationship to others and discover subject matter through others and to be respectful of others and ultimately to turn all those skills that you know how to use to develop your own voice, to in effect be generous and to use those skills to make it be of use, that other people want and need their voices. 
The point was made that roles that might in conventional arts practice be considered technical or secondary are also value-laden; the way they are exercised can have significant impact on CCD projects, so preparation for such roles ought also to be part of education for community cultural development: 
The basic premise of the program in arts management [at a particular university] was that the managers and the people who were studying management had to be engaged in the work. It is intentionally an M.F.A. program, not an M.B.A. program. I would like to put it in terms of cultural development, to recognize that the organizing is a very sophisticated set of problems, to bring art and community together in a healthy relationship around things that make a difference to people. It would be very useful just practically inside the department, in getting the department more coherent. But I also think it would provide a very much needed source for informed people for the field. I don’t think the field has a lot of management programs that have a specific focus with this work and integrate it with the making, not separate it here, but to integrate it with what we call management production or artistic as a whole unit, and everybody’s engaged with that. That would make the program work better and would make the department be much more coherent around these issues. 
fifth, hybrid models had great appeal for many participants, whether collaborations between academic departments or between an academic program and one that is community-based: 
It’s not just in the arts schools, you need to do it everywhere. You could have arts working with legal training. I don’t know where to begin, certainly the arts field needs to take this more seriously, but I know that there is ground in other disciplines. There are social-change social work schools, where they really value people in their communities, and making communities have resources accessible to all people. And the arts must be infused into these kinds of programs, as a wonderful, quote, intervention. And I think that a lot of the students, whatever population they’re working with, disabled youth, it doesn’t matter, that the arts have so much to contribute, and they usually are very hungry, actually hungry for understanding the relationship better. 
You need to just infuse classes in every art department or every education department in use of community-based arts. On the other hand, I think the people who could best inspire and educate might be the people who are doing the work. You know, there needs to be some collaboration—I think in my ideal envisioning, it would be collaboration between an institution of higher education and the people out there in the field doing the work. 
First of all, I’m very much for a hybrid model. And I know that they have problems as well as offer solutions, but I just think that’s the way the world works. I have the inkling that anything separate and rarefied isn’t going to work, not in community arts, it doesn’t make sense to me. I think there’s a lot of ways to be hybrid, and in my mind the pieces of a hybrid model would include 
The Curriculum Project Report  2 September 2008 
a university and something community-based, an artist-driven thing. They would be something that bridges the two, and how those pieces get put together, there’s a lot of different ways. 
ADVANCING COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT 
Throughout this report, participants stressed the centrality of community engagement to CCD learning, seeking ways to extend, deepen and improve the practicum elements of current higher education programs: 
There’s no way that students are really going to understand what the field is like by being in the classroom. There’s something that happens when they are working in the field. I love the fact that [in this program] they’re there for [an extended period], because I think that they understand something about an organizational cycle that you can’t learn in a semester. When you’re only there for a semester, you don’t even have time to fall out of love with the organization. You get so enamored with it, you think that this is the greatest thing in the world, and it’s an important learning step to be able to have the crush and then stay there long enough to realize like, oh man, that person’s really kind of crazy, it’s kind of disorganized here, maybe we’re not going to solve the world’s problems from this particular organization. And then find a way of reconciling a little bit of that disappointment, the reality that these are human beings working hard, in a field that is under-resourced. They’re doing the best they can. They have to experience the whole journey. The essential equality of relationship required for optimal CCD education was strongly stressed, over and over again, without ignoring the difficulty of achieving equality between partners very different in scale and in access to power and privilege: 
I want my students to understand that there’s a responsibility to look at the vast amount of information, both published and unpublished, documented and undocumented, that has happened in our country over the last century, to really understand that before you even begin to go out into the community to do anything. That gives you a sensibility that you’re not the saviors, you don’t know it all, you’re not coming in to help those people do something that you think they should be doing. You enter the field from the perspective of “What can I learn from the communities that have been in this struggle historically for years?” Then it’s “How do I collaborate and partner with this community or with this group of people or with the school to make change happen?” A lot of it is around the student really understanding that sometimes you’re going to have to suspend your way of thinking about how you’re going to produce this art project or how you’re going to produce this collaboration. Maybe you’re coming in and the train is moving already: if you’re going to get on this train, yeah, we welcome you on the train, but what are you going to bring to it? 
Everybody approaching this kind of work has got to understand that the partnerships are equal. That’s not to say that there aren’t dynamics of privilege and dynamics of inequality that have to be acknowledged and have to be addressed. But I think what’s made [one group] tick so effectively for so long is that there was genuine humility from all of us that what our community collaborators had to bring to the table in terms of their life experiences was not only equally valuable but sometimes we felt more valuable than the skills we had to bring as professional theatre artists. And yes, we’re bringing these precious skills to the table: we know how to craft a play, we know how to write a scene, we know how to build a piece of scenery, but the people who’ve lived the story that we’re trying to tell together, that is unbelievably important and valued. And the constantly trying, in our talk, but also in our actions, to reinforce that—I think that allowed people who would be huge skeptics, both within the community and outside the community, to be won over. Because it’s just that absolute rock-bottom sincerity. That’s a very, very tricky thing to teach, but it’s so important. 
One of the most common ideas for improvement was putting control of community engagement initiatives in the hands of a group composed equally of educators and practitioners: 
One of the biggest challenges in community-university partnerships is that there’s always this slogan: “You’re in the ivory tower, you don’t know what we need.” And from the university level it’s, “We’re experts and we can give, give, give, give, give.” So there’s that natural divide. So, maybe if a hub, a committee was equitably formed of academic advisors and community leaders, they 
The Curriculum Project Report    September 2008 
would almost act like a board of directors, and there would be a number of issues at the table, which would be: What is the scholarship on this topic to date? But also, what are the pressing needs and interests in the communities? It would be a more organic or holistic way that they were together. 
I think we should develop a program in partnership with community-based organizations that might not be perfect, but that could really use the brain power, the resources and the energy and creativity of grad students to improve upon what they’re doing already. I think long-term partnerships with community organizations or institutions or even a loose affiliation of people doing this work that could benefit from grad students or undergrads that aren’t going to be there forever. Because at least there’s some consistency, and some life, and some way to implement the work so it just doesn’t disappear when students leave. 
GUIDING AIMS, VALUES AND PRINCIPLES 
For the Curriculum Project team, ten key guidelines sum up the most important values and principles that participants told us should inform future development. 
OVERARCHING VALUES 
In a famous passage of Talmud, Rabbi Hillel responded to the challenge of conveying the essence of Jewish teaching while standing on one foot. “Do not unto others that which is hateful to yourself,” he said. “All the rest is commentary.” Taken together, the two points below pass the one-foot test, conveying the essence of our recommendations based on Curriculum Project research. Like Hillel’s message, they may need elaboration, but they form the spine of the body of learning and practice at this moment in this field. 
All parties should recognize that this is a period of action research, marked by experimentation in program design, curriculum and approach to every element of CCd education, and should engage in a spirit of true collaboration. 
No one has a patent on the definitive CCD curriculum. Even the most promising programs have relatively short track-records. With an open spirit of inquiry and support for field development, all can function as co learners, benefiting from each others’ mistakes and successes. In its search for renewal in changing times, the university needs CCD’s commitments to pluralism, participation and equity, its creativity in the service of social justice. In the search for excellence in preparing young people to do the essential, exciting work of creating civil society, CCD needs the university’s commitment to rigor, reflection and open inquiry. 
It is essential that the values shaping CCD practice also inform and influence education in the field. This is a consistent through-line on almost every page of these findings: you can’t teach people how to enter into democratic dialogue through undemocratic means without canceling the deeper meaning of what you wish to impart; you can’t effectively transmit commitments to pluralism, participation and equity in programs shaped by institutional practices that are exclusionary or elitist; you can’t fully convey the skills of looking fearlessly and understanding deeply in a situation where inquiry is bounded by customs and prohibitions that have the effect of protecting privilege. 
ELEMENTS OF EDUCATION AND DIALOGUE 
excellence requires a balance of community engagement, training in artistic practice and scholarship focusing on the field’s history and animating ideas, as well as the economic and policy environments for it. 
This statement was consistently supported by research participants’ views and experiences, and deserves to be stated as an aim. Indeed, while programs are in this period of development—some of them at the very beginning stages, with just a course or two—achieving ultimate balance may sometimes be little more than a goal. But unless it is kept steadfastly in mind, program development will be distorted, obstacles and expediency combining to skew things toward one or another leg of the triangle of scholarship, training and community engagement. If this is allowed to happen, the result will be programs that are very good at techniques but 
The Curriculum Project Report    September 2008 
poor at preparing students to grapple with why and how to use them, or programs where people talk about community without truly engaging it. All three legs of the triangle are crucial to deep and effective practice. 
When research participants indicated the courses they currently deemed essential to CCD education, only about half of them selected classes and seminars in social-change and social-justice topics or in cultural policy, relevant arts history, theory and criticism of the field, although an additional 37% judged these topics important if not essential. When the Curriculum Project team considered the question of balance, we interpreted these findings in light of the newness of so many higher educational programs: building a curriculum, educators would naturally start with courses that focused on arts practice and community engagement, adding other topics as that became possible. We want to emphasize our conviction that good CCD practitioners need to be skilled in the arts of citizenship, regularly raising their gaze from the little world of the classroom or project to engage with the larger polity. Policymakers’ actions affect resources for CCD as well as vital cultural questions such as whose contributions will be valued and enshrined in a nation’s museums and history books, whose voices will be carried by our enormous, influential commercial cultural industries and whose values will shape education—and such questions are of great moment to the communities CCD practitioners engage. 
vibrant, participatory critical discourse is essential to the success of both higher education and practice in CCd. higher educational institutions are best-positioned to seek support for a sustained, iterative discourse from within their own walls and from resource providers. 
As described earlier, CCD’s characteristic process entails reflecting on and assessing what has been learned from each stage of a project as preparation for each successive stage of action. The same principle applies to the process of defining a field and working together to improve field-wide practice. Within many realms of learning, resources are set aside for elements of intellectual infrastructure conceived with this aim: case studies, other research projects, workshops, critiques shaped by appropriate criteria, databases—all these things embody a commitment to and investment in critical self-reflection and shared aspirations. Some practitioners look back fondly to a period before the major arts funding cuts of the Reagan era, recalling an abundance of opportunities to meet, share and discuss key questions with peers. Whether this existed in the past is not so important as whether it can be supported now. 
There are encouraging signs of growing interest, such as many of the conferences listed in the earlier section on “The State of Community Cultural Development in Higher Education.” Recently, the Community Arts Network has begun online publishing of Community Arts Perspectives, sponsored by the Community Arts Convening and Research Project, described as “a national platform for the work of the universities with degree-granting programs in arts and community building.” An editorial review board of educators oversees publications. This is all to the good, but a multi-directional, interative, critical discourse controlled and created equally by community-based pracitioners and educators has not emerged, and sustained support would be essential to its flowering. 
THE CENTRALITY OF RELATIONSHIP 
Community cultural development in higher education should have an explicit goal of supporting and developing the field beyond university walls. 
Tensions between community artists and educators are evident throughout participants’ comments in this report. Underpinning these tensions is perplexity that CCD is beginning to take root in academia just when many of its longest-lived community manifestations are especially starved for nourishment. Recognizing the very real power and resource differentials that exist between these two sectors, how can they help each other? Educators and practitioners repeatedly point to things each sector does best. Higher education creates room for reflection, supports critical discourse and enables study that is not constrained by the daily demands of practice; community-based practitioners have knowledge grounded in local wisdom and self-awareness, deep understanding of the stories that create community, expertise in the subtle skills of relationship that enable the best work. The field prizes most highly forms of study leading to constructive action: practitioners outside the university should be brought on board as respected advisors to help shape learning and research agendas so that they serve actual practice. Conferences, dialogues and critical writing should be open to non-academic participation, valuing knowledge grounded in practice as highly as academic knowledge. 
The Curriculum Project Report    September 2008 
higher-education programs should develop peer relationships with community-based educational programs for practitioners. 
Naming exemplars and inspirations, research participants singled out leading CCD organizations that mount educational programs, such as Alternate ROOTS, Cornerstone Theater, Liz Lerman Dance Exchange, Sojourn Theatre and Urban Bush Women. None of these programs leads to a degree; indeed, most are short term, intensive workshops and summer camps, a few days or weeks at most. But because they are ongoing, continuously improving, rooted in actual practice and offered by thoughtful and respected practitioners, they are perceived as delivering a great deal in a short time. Over and over again, participants in this study named academic reluctance to validate non-academic knowledge as an obstacle to meaningful, reciprocal relationship. We take this very seriously indeed: unless a fluid exchange between academics and other practitioners can be valued and supported, unless the knowledge and skill of practitioners without academic credentials can be legitimated as a resource for higher education, unless there can be reciprocity grounded in mutual respect, we strongly doubt that CCD can reach its full flowering in higher education. 
effective CCd education requires meaningful, reciprocal and collaborative relationships between educational institutions and community partners, and developing these relationships requires self critical awareness from both parties. 
Anyone undertaking to offer CCD education must address the cultural challenges and institutional obstacles discussed earlier, devising approaches that respond to the realities of both community life and of higher education. Standardized or superficial modes of relationship won’t work: an existing service-learning requirement or a program of short-term placements can never stand in for the ongoing, mutual process of relationship-building that is community cultural development’s heart. Participants told us that higher educators must treat community partners as equals in negotiation, ensuring that community engagement projects serve communities as well as they do students. Where resource differentials exist, educational institutions must extend resources to community partners in recognition of the roles they play in educating students. It is also important to recognize that at this point, most community-based organizations are more accountable and transparent than universities, and that a trusting and mutually satisfying working relationship demands openness. 
INSTITUTIONALIZING CCD EDUCATION 
While “champions” may drive new programs as they come into being, it is critical to move toward strengthening programs, so that they don’t disappear when their founders move on. 
Often, CCD programs’ roots in their institutions are fragile, with a single charismatic champion holding a program in place within an arts department that may be largely indifferent or hostile to CCD. Educators in this entrepreneurial position need to be aware of its vulnerabilities, nurturing allies institution-wide, and administrators need to support those efforts in the interests of long-term viability. 
Practitioners have seen fledgling CCD programs swept aside when budgets are cut or a new department head arrives toting a new programmatic broom. For example, while this study was in preparation, ACT, the Artists, Community and Teaching Program begun in 2004 at Otis College of Art and Design, was dissolved with the arrival of a new department chair. 
An overarching aim should be to infuse CCd values across institutions and programs, connecting CCd-focused programs with a matrix of related departments and programs. 
This goal can be pursued in many ways. One is internal to institutions, building relationships with collaborating programs and departments sharing similar values. Another is multiplying relationships, so that community-based organizations aren’t precariously attached to higher educational institutions through a single faculty member or administrator. Universities, through various departments and programs, can give community partners multiple opportunities to interact with their campus counterparts, from teaching to taking part in program-wide planning discussions. Community cultural development values and practices can be a tremendous asset to on-campus conversations about institutional identity and purpose. If administrators at every campus housing a CCD course or program were to invite practitioners to bring their skills to campus wide dialogues along these lines, the result would be a far more vibrant conversation about the reinvention of the university, generating far more exciting action plans and far more student, faculty and staff engagement. 
The Curriculum Project Report  6 September 2008 
Higher educational institutions are also excellent venues for dialogues between CCD scholars and practitioners and those in allied fields. How is community cultural development thinking and practice enlivening community organizing these days? What is the untapped potential of CCD practice in other arenas such as healthcare and urban planning? Around the world, how are CCD practitioners partners in the movement to mediate the forces of globalization in aid of preserving cultural dynamism and self-determination? Some scholars are studying these questions already, but much more needs doing. Practitioners need help documenting examples and conveying them to wider audiences through meetings, media and publications; and academic departments seeking to renew their own fields and excite students will gain tremendously from practitioners’ expansive thinking. 
SEIZING OPPORTUNITY 
Community cultural development practitioners and educators should collaborate in pursuing emergent opportunities that can benefit both higher education and community-based practitioners. 
The drive to renew higher education is one of these opportunities, as mentioned earlier: CCD practitioners have enormous skill and energy to bring to that task. The approaching presidential election points to another potential opportunity in the larger political arena, with the possibility that a new president may call for increased funding for cultural development or job creation programs that could support community artists. It is also possible that a new administration would initiate new public-sector funding opportunities that could support education in this field or stimulate expanded CCD activity. It’s vital that members and friends of the field remain aware of new developments in cultural policy that can affect its future, and be ready to respond when opportunity arises. 
IN CONCLUSION 
When we met to review our research and discuss our findings, members of the Curriculum Project team began by sharing immediate observations—whatever struck us most forcefully, whatever confirmed our prior views and whatever challenged them. We remarked on the field’s fragmentation, the newness of so many initiatives in higher education and all the challenges that attach to that condition, the very real restrictions educators faced in translating a community-based practice into higher-education settings. We also noticed how eager and generous people were with their participation: educators are challenging themselves, they see what needs attention and they dearly want partners within higher education and among community-based practitioners to help satisfy their very real desire to make these new programs as powerful, whole and socially significant as they know community cultural development practice to be. 
When we issued the “Call for Excellence” that inaugurated this project, we imagined it might result in a new program of initiatives needed to bring the field to ripening at this time of great activity and great opportunity. It is evident now that no single organization or project has the ability to implement the insights and recommendations derived from this research; rather, it is a large, multifaceted national project, with roles for everyone who cares about educating young people for community cultural development work. We hope to do our part, and we invite every reader of this report to seriously consider what steps he or she can take to ensure the harvest of U.S.-based CCD practitioners gains in quality, quantity and impact each year. 
The Curriculum Project Report  7 September 2008 
SeCTion 6: bACK mATTer 
ACKnoWledGemenTS 
Project team members are grateful for the support of the Nathan Cummings Foundation in carrying out our research and creating this report. We want especially to acknowledge the staff of Imagining America for providing such timely and expert support to the project. 
BACKGROUND RESEARCH, INTERVIEWS AND SURVEYS 
In preparing the study on which this report is based, the Lead Investigators conducted confidential telephone interviews with the 28 individuals listed below. In addition, 231 surveys were completed by educators, artists, activists and others involved in the field. Our deepest thanks to these individuals who gave so generously of their time and thoughtful observations. Team members also compiled course descriptions and syllabi for CCD-related courses and programs in higher education and community settings; the Community Arts Network <www.communityarts.net> was an especially useful source for that task. A summary sampling those descriptions appears as an appendix to this report. 
Buzz Alexander, University of Michigan, Prison Creative Arts Project, Ann Arbor, MI Arnold Aprill, Chicago Arts Partnerships in Education (CAPE), Chicago, IL Andrea Assaf, New WORLD Theater, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA Caron Atlas, independent consultant, Arts & Democracy Project, Center for Civic Participation, Brooklyn, 
NY Judy Baca, University of California at Los Angeles and Social and Public Art Resource Center (SPARC), 
Venice, CA Ron Bechet, Xavier University, New Orleans, LA Nancy Cantor, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY Nicole Garneau, Columbia College Chicago, Arts in Youth and Community Development, Chicago, IL Pam Heinz, Mary Ann Shaw Center for Public and Community Service, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY Nick Jaffe, Teaching Artist Journal, Chicago, IL Erica Kohl, Institute of the Study of Social Change, University of California, Berkeley, CA Bob Leonard, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA Liz Lerman, Liz Lerman Dance Exchange, Takoma Park, MD Sonia BasSheva Mañjon, Wesleyan University, Middletown, CT Randy Martin, New York University, New York, NY Susan Perlstein, National Center for Creative Aging, Washington, DC and Brooklyn, NY Nick Rabkin, Center for Arts Policy, Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, IL Bill Rauch, Oregon Shakespeare Festival, Ashland, OR Michael Rohd, Sojourn Theatre, Portland, OR, and Northwestern University, Evanston, IL Rosalba Rolón, Pregones Theater, Bronx, NY Jim Shanley, Fort Peck Community College, Poplar, MT Judith Tannenbaum, WritersCorps, El Cerrito, CA Jack Tchen, New York University, New York, NY Carlton Turner, Alternate ROOTS, M.U.G.A.B.E.E., Raymond, MS Roberta Uno, Ford Foundation, New York, NY Marta Moreno Vega, Franklin H. Williams Caribbean Cultural Center African Diaspora Institute, New York, NY Chris Vine, Creative Arts Team, City University of New York, New York, NY Billy Yalowitz, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA Finally, we are grateful to the organizers of the March, 2008 Community Arts Convening and Research Project at Maryland Institute College of Art in Baltimore, who allowed members of The Curriculum Project team to conduct a pre-conference session of story circles and discussions with interested educators, students and practitioners. 
The Curriculum Project Report  8 September 2008 
APPendiX: The CurriCulum ProjeCT GloSSArY 
Every field has its own vocabulary. Often, terms overlap, with people calling the same practices by different names. This glossary is intended to help clarify some of the terms you will encounter in reading about The Curriculum Project. Community describes a unit of social organization based on some distinguishing characteristic or affinity: proximity (“the Cambridge community”), belief (“the Jewish community”), ethnicity (“the Latino community”), profession (“the medical community”), or orientation (“the gay community”). The word’s meaning becomes more concrete closer to the ground: “the gay, Jewish, academic community of Cambridge” probably describes a group of people who have a passing chance of being acquainted, whereas many of the more general formulations are ideological assertions. As Raymond Williams put it in Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society (Oxford University Press, 1976), 
Community can be the warmly persuasive word to describe an existing set of relationships or the warmly persuasive word to describe an alternative set of relationships. What is most important, perhaps, is that unlike all other terms of social organization (state, nation, society, etc.) it seems never to be used unfavorably and never to be given any positive opposing or distinguishing term. In the context of community cultural development, “community” describes a dynamic process or characteristic. There is general recognition that to be more than an ideological assertion, the bonds of community must be consciously, perpetually renewed. In contrast, a network is a much looser form of association. 
Community Arts/Artist: This is the common term for community cultural development in Britain and most other Anglophone countries. A distinction is often made by adding the word “based.” While community-based arts emerge from a local group’s experience and imagination, the conventional idea of community theatre, for example, is the amateur remounting of established plays without an effort to express something specific about local people in this time and place. “Community arts” is also in use in the U.S., but in U.S. English, the term is also sometimes used to describe conventional arts activity based in a municipality, such as “the Anytown Arts Council, a community arts agency.” “Community artists” or “community-based artists” are the individuals engaged in this work. Community Cultural development describes a range of initiatives undertaken by artists in collaboration with other community members to express identity, concerns and aspirations through the arts and communications media, while building the capacity for social action and contributing to social change. Sometimes abbreviated CCD. The Curriculum Project uses this term because it seems to encompass all the key elements of the practice: community, culture and development (or as in the title of this report, culture and community development). 
Community engagement describes the internships, field placements and university-community projects that are part of many community cultural development education programs. In The Curriculum Project, the term is used to indicate a kind of reciprocal, mutually respective working relationship between students, faculty and community partners. Community organizing describes the process of bringing people together to act on their common interests. In The Curriculum Project, this term is used to describe activities that seek social justice and cultural democracy. The goal of such community organizing is to create social movements, helping to build a base of common concerns and aspirations and to mobilize community members to act in concert. 
Culture in its broadest, anthropological sense includes all that is fabricated, endowed, designed, articulated, conceived, or directed by human beings, as opposed to what is given in nature. Culture includes both material elements (buildings, artifacts, etc.) and immaterial ones (ideology, value systems, languages). Culture encompasses the distinctive spiritual, intellectual, emotional and material traditions and features of a people or society. development (with its many subsets such as “economic development,” “community development,” and “cultural development”) describes a process of analyzing the resources and needs of a particular community or social sector, then planning and implementing a program of interlocking initiatives to rectify deficiencies and build on strengths. The community cultural development field stresses participatory, self-directed development strategies, where members of a community define their own aims and determine their own paths to reach 
The Curriculum Project Report  9 September 2008 
them, rather than imposed development, which tends to view communities as problems to be solved by bringing circumstances in line with predetermined norms. Popular theatre/Theatre for development: These two terms have different origins, but over time, they have become more or less interchangeable. “Theatre for Development,” originating in Africa, Asia and Latin America, typically refers to the work of troupes touring indigenous communities and using enactments, stories and music in local languages to convey development-related knowledge, such as how to ensure a clean water supply, increase crop yields, or prevent the spread of HIV. Very often, the underlying aim is to make use of traditions deeply embedded in local culture that can help promote development, while encouraging a critical relationship to the cultural understandings that deter it. “Popular Theatre” (sometimes “People’s Theatre”) encompasses Theatre for Development and other drama-based practices focusing on social justice. One of the most widespread forms is Forum Theatre, pioneered by Augusto Boal. 
Service-learning: Campus Compact, one of service-learning’s most active advocates, defines it as follows: 
Service-learning incorporates community work into the curriculum, giving students real-world learning experiences that enhance their academic learning while providing a tangible benefit for the community. 
Wherever service-learning is understood as conditioned on equal partnerships, it can be strongly compatible with community cultural development’s values. Where it is not, real community engagement can be watered down to little more than field experience or extra credit for students, without much regard for its larger impact. Social justice is a social goal: a society in which justice is achieved in every sphere, including economic, political and cultural. Those who pursue social justice seek a fair distribution of social goods, such as equal access to opportunity, equal standing before the law, equal voice in determining society’s direction, and equal standing in social and cultural institutions, regardless of cultural heritage, race, gender, disability, education, or class. Inherent in the term is a critique of entrenched power and privilege. The term is used in The Curriculum Project to describe the commitments to pluralism, participation and equity that motivate much community cultural development work. 
Scholarship is used in The Curriculum Project to describe those elements of education for community cultural development that focus on the field’s history and animating ideas, as well as the economic and policy environments for community arts work. In this pillar of community cultural development education, students learn about history, cultural policy, the development of art forms and practices, the ideas that drive the work, and the larger social and ethical issues that concern practitioners. This component of CCD education involves reading, writing and critical reflection about both theoretical and practical aspects of the work. Teaching artist is a term for artists working in schools and other learning settings. They are not art teachers per se, but working artists who bring their skills and perspectives into classrooms, after-school programs, social service agencies. and sometimes other institutions such as hospitals and prisons. Some teaching artists think of themselves as community artists, applying community cultural development values and methods to their work, but this is not universal. 
Training is used in The Curriculum Project to refer to practical learning, such as developing skills in group facilitation, community organizing methodologies and artistic practice. 
The Curriculum Project Report  0 September 2008 
APPendiX: A SAmPlinG of CourSeS And ProGrAmS 
What follows are brief descriptions of a selection of courses and educational programs related to community cultural development from across the U.S. The material is organized in four categories: Programs at Art Schools; Programs at Other Higher Educational Institutions; Individual Courses and Community-Based Programs. Wherever possible, descriptions are based on programs’ own public information, much of it generously provided by participants in Curriculum Project research. 
PROGRAMS AT ART SCHOOLS 
b.f.A. in Community Arts, California College of the Arts, oakland, CA 
CCA’s Community Arts Program, begun in 2004 Sonia BasSheva Mañjon, Ph.D., is an interdisciplinary, community-based approach to creative practice that draws on the resources of the Center for Art and Public Life. Students explore how artists interact, collaborate and intervene in a variety of social networks while committing themselves to build sustainable community relationships, engage cultural diversity and stimulate social transformation. An interdisciplinary program, the Community Arts BFA focuses on community-based arts practice and theory, with an emphasis on service-learning, civic engagement and issues in diversity. The curriculum combines coursework in the humanities and sciences with studios, courses in arts administration and cultural diversity and a required internship. Curriculum consists of 33 total units of studio requirements and 51 total units of humanities and sciences requirements plus 42 total units of community arts major requirements including: Introduction to Community Arts; Art & Society; Art Education; Technology Suite Studios; Mentorship Studio; Public Art & Community Collaboration; Studio Art Concentration; Senior Thesis; Community Arts Studio Electives. 
b.A. in Performing Arts and Social justice, visual & Performing Arts department, university of San francisco, San francisco, CA 
This program culminates in a year in the community working with community organizations and developing artistic responses to those experiences. The Upper Division Company of majors and faculty produces programs in “ongoing dialogue with the USF and Bay Area community,” including production work with community groups such as ex-offenders, on and off-campus. Courses combine classical training and cutting-edge innovation. After completing foundations courses in performance, students are admitted as members of The Company, a student/faculty collaboration for majors only. The Company combines creative risk-taking with a serious engagement in community issues, culminating with the production of an original show. Students may choose an emphasis in either Dance or Theater. 
masters in Arts management with a concentration in Arts in Youth & Community development, Department of Liberal Education and Office of Community Arts Partnerships, Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, il 
This program was developed in 2003 by the Center for Community Arts Partnerships (CCAP) and the Department of Arts, Entertainment and Media Management to address the professional development needs of future leaders in the field of community-based youth arts. In the AYCD program, academic coursework is intrinsically linked to hands-on learning and leadership opportunities at community-based organizations and public institutions in the youth development sector, including a four-semester intensive practicum in which students work up to 20 hours a week in community-based youth arts organizations situated in neighborhoods throughout Chicago, serving low-income, under-represented and immigrant youth populations with multidisciplinary arts programs in writing, performance, music, visual art, public art, media and digital technology. The program focuses on three major areas of professional development: practical skills necessary for operating an organization, theoretical and philosophical aspects of youth development and understanding the role of the arts in the lives of young people and how they relate to society at large. 
master of Arts in Community Arts, Center for Art education, maryland institute College of Art, baltimore, mdFor visual artists who wish to pursue a career in art-based youth and community development. This is a 36-credit program, spanning two summers and one academic year, grounded in principles of social justice. The program includes classroom study of community arts theory and practice plus residency with community 
The Curriculum Project Report 6  September 2008 
organizations. Students learn to: conceive, implement and manage programs and events that engage children, youth and adults in meaningful art experiences; document and assess effectiveness of projects in meeting community interests; plan curriculum; develop proposals and fundraise. masters of fine Arts in Graduate Studies: Public Practices, otis College of Art & design, los Angeles, CAThis two-year, 60-credit program in Public Practice offers opportunities for close study with internationally known artists and theorists, field internships and teaching assistantships. Participants develop new artistic strategies and practices based on observation, research, social commentary and activism and visual and public performance art productions. The program, under the leadership of Suzanne Lacy, enriches an arts environment marked by a remarkable mix of art schools and a distinguished history of artistic innovation. Graduate students explore new artistic strategies and practices based on observation, research, social commentary and activism, and visual and performance arts productions in the public realm. Students work in individual studios on a single significant project in collaboration with each other, community members, interdisciplinary scholars and faculty. Students must be proficient in one form of visual art and one public practice such as teaching, community organizing or nonprofit program development. Program includes 39 studio credits, 21 credits in other studies and 14 credits in electives. master of Public Art Studies (mPAS), School of fine Arts university of Southern California, los Angeles, CA 
A two-year program comprising evening classes, mentored field internships, thesis projects and the administration of campus-based public art projects. Students acquire professional skills as public arts administrators, public art consultants, cultural policymakers, grant writers, nonprofit directors and public artists. Students engage communities in public art projects, conduct research and question paradigms in established public art theory, develop new working models and put them into practice and explore the role of technology in the field. 
PROGRAMS AT OTHER HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS 
Arts and Community Practice Certificate Program, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL 
This focused concentration on application of arts to community development is for undergraduates and graduate students in social work, dance and art education/therapy. The program integrates the theoretical and practical aspects of dance, art education/therapy and community-based generalist/clinical social work. Requirements include coursework in art education/therapy, dance and social work totaling at least 12 semester hours with at least three semester hours taken from each program in certificate-approved courses. Inclusive of groups and families, it addresses all stages of human development. Particular attention is given to prevention, enrichment and response to social concerns. Requirements include a major paper linking theory and applied experience. Community Arts management minor, department of Art, Xavier university of louisiana, new orleans, lA 
The mission of this minor is “to help students develop analytical and strategic skills while expanding their understanding of artistic disciplines and their importance to community building and social enterprise.” Goals include incorporating and documenting the arts as an agent for social change and a tool to build community relationships. Students gain practical experience through intern and volunteer opportunities with community based art organizations. Students must complete nine hours of art courses and nine hours of business courses for those students who are not art or business majors. Community Arts undergraduate minor, Arts and Administration Program, School of the Arts and Applied Architecture, university of oregon, eugene or 
This 28-credit minor is designed for students interested in participating, leading and organizing arts in community settings. Students from Theatre, Dance, Music, Art, Education, Sociology and Family and Human Services take coursework in arts administration and programming, arts philosophy, arts education and community cultural development. Course requirements encourage students to be cognizant of the relationships between arts and culture, ethnicity, politics, economics, education, class, gender, age and occupation. Optional practicum: apprenticeship with local arts organization. 
The Curriculum Project Report  2 September 2008 
Cross-disciplinary Arts in Community Program, Art and Art education department, Tyler School of Art, Temple university, Philadelphia, PA 
University courses, field internships, after-school arts workshops, intergenerational forums and interdisciplinary community-based performances/exhibitions feed into ongoing collaborations with local arts organizations based on an exchange of knowledge and images between partners, to create art based on the lives and stories of North Philadelphia. The program works in partnership with community organizations, schools and artists in North Philadelphia, collaborating on program development with Art Sanctuary, the Asian Arts Initiative, Temple University’s New City Writing Program and local schools. Over the past three years we have created performances and installations that have garnered critical acclaim and enthusiastic local and city wide audiences. Four courses are currently part of the program and a certificate program is in development. 
minor in Applied Theatre, drama department, Tisch School of the Arts, new York university, new York, nY 
The Minor in Applied Theatre offers interested students, both theatre specialists and non-specialists, the opportunity to learn how performance has been and can be a vital adjunct to non-theatrical professions and cultural practices. The Minor consists of a minimum of four four-point courses, three of which must be from a list of designated Department of Drama courses, all of which address theatrical performance in non-theatrical contexts, such as Community-Based Theatre, History of Community-Based Performance, The Actor Teacher I & II, Theatre and Therapy I & II, Theories of Community and Performance, Boal & Beyond and Internship in Applied Theatre. 
b.A. in Theatre in education and Community, department of Theatre, California Polytechnic, Pomona, CAThis program educates artists, teachers and advocates for theater in educational settings and communities, preparing them for employment in these fields and life-long commitment to civic engagement and socially responsible art. The program includes history, theories and methodologies of theater in education, community based theater, theater for youth and using theater to teach across the curriculum. The program offers access to nationally recognized community-based theater companies such as Cornerstone Theater Company and Fringe Benefits Alliance. Includes community-based performance projects and service-learning opportunities with regional community partners. 
b.A. in visual and Public Art, visual and Public Art department, College of Arts humanities and Social Sciences, California State university, monterey bay, Seaside, CA 
This 120 total credit program prepares students to be arts practitioners with a set of skills and values that will make them active and responsible participants in society. VPA integrates individual production and collaborative processes, skills and projects, and the expressive and analytical. It addresses the complex issues of working in public space creating murals, sculptures, installations, book arts, painted and electronic billboards, light sculptures, large-scale digital and cyber art, time-based work, performance and environmental art and public ceremonial works. VPA provides a balance of studio and theory through a combination of core concept and skill courses, visiting artist experiences, independent learning opportunities and a community based projects/service-learning component. Concentrations are offered in Large-Scale Painting and Murals, Large-Scale Sculpture and Installation, Integrated Media and Photography (digital art, electronic art) and Arts Education and Museum Studies. 
m.A. in Applied Theatre, School of Professional Studies, City university of new York, new York, nY 
The M.A. in Applied Theatre, the first of its kind in the United States, is a sequential, ensemble-based program for students interested in the use of theatre to address social and educational issues in a wide range of settings. This 36-credit ensemble-based program stresses the unity of theory and practice and is linked to the professional applied theatre work of the Creative Arts Team (CAT). Students are introduced to the history of the theatre movements and practices, exploring key theories in theatre, human development, learning theory and community development. They are taught the skills and strategies necessary for creating and implementing the work, and are asked to think critically about the goals of the work in relation to different audiences, needs and community contexts. One-semester apprenticeship opportunities are offered with CAT’s professional outreach programs or appropriate programs elsewhere. All students culminate their studies with a Project Thesis in which they research, create, implement and document an original applied theatre model. 
The Curriculum Project Report 6  September 2008 
m.A. in urban Studies: Arts in Transformation Track, eastern university, Philadelphia 
Twenty-four-month Christian-leadership degree program in short residency formats to accommodate working and out-of-state students. Provides skills, knowledge, practice and spiritual foundation for “artist practitioners committed to transforming cities through a broad range of artistic expression.” Special focus on arts-based interventions at individual, family, community, social-service and organizational-leadership levels through field-intensive community partnerships. 
mfA Program in directing and Public dialogue, virginia Tech, department of Theater Arts, blacksburg, vA 
This program offers professional training in stage direction and artistic leadership within the evolving field of professional, community-based ensemble theater in the United States, providing training for directing plays, developing and maintaining an ensemble, working with actors and non-actors and non-actors in creative projects, creating and performing original work, forming and facilitating creative community partnerships, and animating community dialogue through theater—all within the context of the artist as an engaged citizen. The program is built on the relationship between projects and tutorials. Led by the primary advisor in consultation with the student’s graduate committee, the student develops a personalized plan of study tailored to specific background, needs and personal goals of the student. 
mfA in Theatre: Theatre for Youth, Arizona State university, Tempe, AZ 
This concentration offers comprehensive course work within a minimum 60-semester-hour professional program, providing the skills and experiences needed to prepare for work as drama specialists, for teaching in the field of Theatre for Youth, for professional careers in children’s theatre and for work in community theatres, recreational programs and social agencies. Admission requires 30 prior semester-hours in theatre. Thirty-six hours of required classes include: Research Methods, Theatre History, Studies in Dramatic Theory and Criticism, Methods of Teaching Drama, Community Based Drama, Advanced Studies in Theatre for Youth, Theatre for Youth Tour, Improvisation with Youth Seminar or Practicum. Each student undertakes a formal one-semester internship with a professional theatre, arts organization, or educational institution. 
The Arts of Citizenship Program, university of michigan, Ann Arbor, mi 
This program helps undergraduates work in guided teams with community partners in Ann Arbor and Detroit to create community-based drama and dance, radio documentaries, history exhibits, Web sites and curricula as well as major projects in “cultural partnership” with community organizations, fostering public scholarship. Arts of Citizenship programs are designed to bring faculty, staff and students into collaboration on projects with educators, cultural and arts institutions, government and community partners; encourage teaching and pedagogical practices that link the study of culture and citizenship with experiential, practice based learning; support scholarship, creative work and intellectual conversation that further the public roles of the arts, humanities and design; and build capacity of faculty, staff, students and community partners to engage in sustainable collaborative endeavors that enrich curriculum, research and creative work and expand the social capital of community collaborators. 
Prison Creative Arts Project, university of michigan, Ann Arbor, mi 
Founded in 1990 by Buzz Alexander, University of Michigan Professor of English, PCAP is committed to original work in the arts in Michigan correctional and juvenile facilities and has worked with prison actors, writers and performers to create two dance performances, more than 174 original plays in 18 Michigan prisons, 109 original plays in four juvenile facilities and 70 plays in Detroit high schools and one rural high school. Since 1998, the program has supported more than 40 creative writing workshops in Michigan prisons with 39 public readings and 26 anthologies. The program has also curated 10 exhibitions of Art by Michigan Prisoners and three exhibitions of art by incarcerated youth from four juvenile facilities. Alexander and partner Janie Paul train and mentor many students who facilitate PCAP workshops and continue connecting with the project after they graduate. Students become involved in PCAP through coursework with Alexander or Paul, such as courses in Community Writing and Public Culture, Discourse and Society and Topics in American Culture. 
INDIVIDUAL COURSES 
Much of the material in this section is based on course syllabi posted on the Community Arts Network at www.communityarts.net/canu/syllabi/index.php. Where dates appear after course names, they refer to the 
The Curriculum Project Report 6  September 2008 
semester or quarters for which a syllabus was provided. Some courses may have been offered in earlier iterations, subsequently repeated or modified and offered again, and others may be one-time offerings. Art As Activism, roosevelt university, Chicago, il, maggie leininger (Spring 2008) 
This course will investigate current theory as it relates to public, guerilla and political/social based art work. In addition, students will develop a collaborative public art work that will take place in North Lawndale community of Chicago with Umoja, a non-profit group that assists high school students at Manley High School to enter college. Students will be responsible for initiating, implementing and completing this collaborative process and will have direct interactions with members of Umoja and the North Lawndale community. Art of the Public, Williams College, Williamstown, mA, Peggy diggs (Spring 2005) 
“New genre public art [is] visual art that uses both traditional and nontraditional media to communicate and interact with a broad and diversified audience about issues directly relevant to their lives [and] is based on engagement.” So writes Suzanne Lacy, a long-time practitioner of such work. Engagement with members of the public is the premise on which this public art tutorial is founded: the hands-on work of the class will consist in exploring issues directly relevant to the lives of targeted audience-participants. We will develop art designed for a life outside of the gallery, art that emphasizes a process of engagement with issues. We will investigate the places where we live, our environs, by listening, looking, reading, interviewing. Students will learn how to elicit thoughts of local citizens and, through workshops and collaborative processes, evolve projects that will air those concerns in public settings and in public formats. Art, Activism, and Community: Social Change through the visual Arts, Tisch College of Citizenship and Public Service, Tufts university, medford, mA, mindy nierenberg (Spring 2008) 
How do artists address social issues? Can art transform lives? How can art serve as a force for creating public dialogue? Are there different aesthetics for art with a social or political message? In this course students will explore visual art created for positive social change. Through slide lectures and guest artists, students will learn and engage in dialogue about contemporary artists that are addressing issues of the environment, racial and cultural identity, human rights, healthcare and social justice. Innovative community-based art organizations will also be studied, with guest lecturers from local Boston organizations who have developed nationally recognized models. Students in this course will also have the opportunity to create an interdisciplinary public art installation with two visiting artists through the project “Harmony in the Age of Noise”. Arts and Community Development, Saint Mary’s University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, Tom borrup (Summer 2008) 
This course explores vitality in geographic communities and the unique role played by culture. We’ll examine the dynamic relationships that exist between artists, cultural organizations and communities and ways that culture can be an active agent or catalyst for economic, social and civic development. Topics include a historical overview of the community development field, concepts of creative community building and how the civic and economic impact of the arts can be measured. Case studies of cooperative partnerships will also be explored. Specific areas of concentration include arts-based community building strategies and how indicators are used to measure outcomes. Arts and Peacebuilding, Georgetown university, Washington, dC, Craig Zelizer (Spring 2007) 
Throughout the globe, there are numerous individuals, groups and organizations using arts-based processes to support peacebuilding efforts in severely conflicted societies. Arts processes, such as theater, music and film, can be an especially effective means to bring together identity groups who are in conflict, by sharing common cultural experiences and engaging in cooperative creative projects. The power of various arts processes to impact individuals emotionally, psychologically and spiritually via the creative process can help foster change within and between conflicted groups. However, the arts are not necessarily a magic panacea for addressing conflicts, it also vital to explore how they can legitimate cultures of violence in conflict regions. The course will cover a combination of theory and real-world cases, helping to contextualize many key concepts. In addition, students will receive practical exposure to several arts-based processes through exercises, guest speakers and research projects. Through taking this course, students will develop an understanding of how professionals and organizations are incorporating innovative arts-based peacebuilding processes in diverse settings that can help inform their future work. 
The Curriculum Project Report 6  September 2008 
beyond mexican murals: intermediate muralism and Community development, university of California at los Angeles, los Angeles, CA, judy baca (Winter 2008) 
This is one class in a four-course sequence taken over two quarters: Beyond the Mexican Mural Beginning and Intermediate and Digital Mural Lab Beginning and Intermediate. The sequence of four courses is required to carry out the production of a mural for an actual community site. The winter course is a continuation of investigation of muralism as method of community education, development and empowerment. The class includes exploration of issues through development of a large-scale collaborative digitally created image and/ or painting for placement in community. Students research, design and work with community participants, continuing the project through states of production to full scale and community approval. 
boal and beyond drama department, Tisch School of the Arts, new York university, new York, nY, jan Cohen-Cruz (Spring 2005) 
An introduction to the practice and ideas of Augusto Boal’s Theatre of the Oppressed, a body of theatrical techniques that physically activate spectators and empower them to rehearse alternatives to their collective and individual oppressions. Participants will begin each day playing some of Boal’s games. We’ll then focus on the major techniques—forum, in which spectators explore their own solutions to collective problems by intervening at the crisis point of a scenario; image, a techniques that privileges physical expression, providing an alternative form of communication not reliant on language; invisible theatre, staged in public spaces and masquerading as life; and rainbow of desire, a body of therapeutic techniques geared toward the individual. I’ll describe his more recent work with legislative theatre and sambopera. We’ll then move on to adaptations of this work beyond Boal, in response to the desires of the participants and perhaps, time allowing, will explore his “joker system,” a totally beguiling and under-explored way Boal devised of working with dramatic material. 
Citizen Artist, bowling Green State university, bowling Green, oh, Kate Collins (Spring 2008) 
Students enrolled in the Citizen Artist course will: explore the field of arts-based civic dialogue and develop an understanding of the ways in which art can and has enriched civic life in America; strengthen theatre techniques and skills necessary for devising collaborative original works; expand critical thinking skills as we pursue opportunities for civic dialogue and become familiar with different conceptualizations of citizenship; collaborate in crafting an interdisciplinary arts and dialogue-based curriculum with purposeful civic learning objectives; cultivate problem-solving skills as we see a community-based arts project through from start to finish; experience the ways in which the work of artists making intentional choices can serve as a valuable means to establish deeper connections within and between diverse communities; immerse themselves in a service-learning partnership and discover the many significant ways in which those who hold privilege in our society can become allies and agents of change. 
Community research Service-learning, visual and Public Art department, California State university monterey bay, Seaside, CA, Stephanie A. johnson (Spring 2005) 
The Community Research Service-Learning Course is a learning experience designed to provide students with both theoretical and hands-on approaches to the concept of community empowerment and growth through the use of collaborative art activities. This semester students will develop the necessary skills for working in community settings: problem-solving, research, cross-cultural communication techniques, media analysis, ethical reflection techniques and methods of evaluating accountability as well as project planning, revision and presentation. Students can choose to spend the semester in placements with community partner organizations of the Reciprocal University of the Arts Project (RUAP) of The Visual and Public Art and The Music and Performing Arts Institutes or they find their own placements. The innovative approach to integrating community and university resources that is central to RUAP will provide a unique opportunity for students to develop and facilitate arts and recreational programs with local agencies. In addition to on-site placement work, class activities planned for this semester include community research exercises, research projects, presentations, guest lecturers and field trips to local organizations. 
Community-based Theatre: Art, Culture and Social Change, new York university, new York. nY, Caron Atlas (fall 2003) 
Our goal is to broaden our perspective and deepen our understanding of the intersection between art, culture and social change in creation, cultural organizing and cultural policy. Guest artists, organizers and policymakers will present interactive case studies to stimulate critical thinking and reflection about the practice 
The Curriculum Project Report 66 September 2008 
of this work. A discussion of values and principles will be a through-line for this course. We will begin by developing a series of questions to pose to our guests about how they do their work, how it ties into concepts and strategies for change, what systems support them, what methodologies and creative processes they engage, and what impact the work has. Guests will also be asked to talk about the questions they are asking of themselves and their colleagues. Creating Meaning through Community Drama: Making Theatre Based on a Community’s Own Stories, City university of new York School of Professional Studies, new York, nY 
This course is designed to prepare students to devise and perform appropriate, theatre-based community interventions based on the community’s own stories. They will gain a theoretical and practical grounding in the study of community theatre processes through which practitioners work in, with and for a specific community. They will intervene using theatre strategies, to interrogate particular interests, problems or issues that the community wishes to share. Cultural, ethnic and Gender issues in dramatic literature (Topic: Community-based Theatre), miami university, oxford, oh, Ann elizabeth Armstrong (Spring 2003) 
In this class, we will focus on three specific methods for creating community-based performance: 1.) Augusto Boal’s Theatre of the Oppressed, 2.) Story-telling, oral history and documentary drama, 3.) Street theatre. Each of these methods will be employed in relationship to the Over-the-Rhine neighborhood community in Cincinnati and the history of Freedom Summer 1964 at Western College, Oxford, OH. By studying community based art-making, we will inevitably challenge many ideas that we hold about “community,” “art,” and “theatre.” In many ways, we will think as interdisciplinary artists, embodying the perspectives of psychology, sociology, political science, education and cultural studies as well as those of visual artists, actors, playwrights and musicians. As we translate theories into our own practical projects, we will encounter several difficult questions such as: How do you define “community”? What is the relationship between art and ideology? How can theatre stimulate political and social change? What is the role of the artist in relationship to the community? How can marginalized groups use theatre to form a collective voice? How can performance serve to raise our consciousness? How can art empower communities and individuals, providing the tools of agency? Can theatre provide unique opportunities for expression in a world of mass media? Do You See What I’m Saying? Beloit College, Beloit, WI, Amy Sarno and Darren Kelly (Fall 2007) 
Right here, in Beloit, Wisconsin, is the site of the only known community housing built exclusively for African American workers in the state, comprising four apartment buildings in the process of being restored. Kelly, Sarno, class participants and community members will work together to preserve the spirit of this site. Initially, the course will focus on the historical and socio-cultural development of the Flats with special attention to industry and migration in the United States generally and Beloit specifically. During this time, the students will also participate in workshops on such topics as observation skills, listening/interview/recording techniques and facilitation skills. In the second half of the class, students will join community members in mapping exercises and story exchanges to develop a form of reminiscence theatre that will be used as the groundwork for a larger education and outreach program for the Fairbanks Flats Revitalization Group. The goals of this course are: 1) to familiarize students with the historical significance of Beloit; 2) to introduce students to basic community-based creative practices used for urban renewal; 3) to develop research and production skills necessary for community-based performance; 4) to explore issues of class and race as they pertain to both the individual and community; and 5) to develop collaborative learning skills. field internship in Community Arts, Temple university, Philadelphia, PA, billy Yalowitz, Pepón osorio (Spring 2005) 
An experiential introduction to Community Arts, focusing on artist/community collaborations. Community Arts projects bring artists together with people of a community of location, spirit, or tradition, to create art that is based in the life of that community. Projects with two communities will be undertaken this Spring. This course will lay the groundwork for the basic understanding of these two communities. We will use our experience and process to create parallels with other arts projects dealing with communities that have been created throughout the United States. Starting from the notion that Art already exists in communities and that every community has art objects and performance processes, we will develop unique projects that will introduce a different approach to the audience. Community Arts is a cyclical process, an exchange where we from Tyler/Temple will inform the communities with whom we work as much as we will be informed by them. This 
The Curriculum Project Report 67 September 2008 
approach to art has a set of demands that differ from traditional art-making. Community Arts is a powerful tool for developing an understanding of interacting with people and the visual world, and for furthering personal vision and an understanding of the responsibility of choice in the creative process. This course will expand the student’s visual and performative capacities. We will explore an array of approaches from creating points of negotiation with our audience to creating work in a relatively unknown environment. From the self to the collective, we will investigate and experience various concepts essential in contemporary art-making. While collaborating in the creating of Art, students will be looking at their own ways of approaching the community as well as seeing past Community Arts works made by other artists. Attention will be given to the role of research in the creative process. interdisciplinary Seminar in Community-based Arts, Temple university, Philadelphia, PA, billy Yalowitz (fall 2004) 
The goals of this course are for students to learn about the history and theory of Community-based Arts; to learn to think critically about the issues of race, class and aesthetics inherent in Community-based Arts practice; and to gain exposure to established Community-based Arts projects in Philadelphia through field trips and guest speakers. The course will prepare students to become involved in the growing number of field internships in Community Arts that are being offered through Temple’s Community Arts & Literacy Network. We will study and visit key community-based arts programs in Philadelphia. Students will then choose from one of several ongoing community arts projects underway in North Philadelphia with partnering arts organizations, and will participate in workshops at these sites. introduction to Community Arts, California College of Arts, oakland, CA, Sonia basSheva mañjon, Ph.d. (Spring 2006 and 2007) 
This course explores how students can be active participants in society by defining and practicing the integration of art and social change. Community artists find creative solutions to political, social and economic issues in urban, rural and global communities. Community artists have been collaborating with and working for community organizations, service providers, cultural and educational institutions and government agencies as active agents for social engagement and change. This class will survey community arts movements in the 20th Century and present including the Arts and Crafts Movement, WPA Era, Harlem Renaissance, Chicano Art Movement, Community Cultural Centers, Artists in Correctional Facilities, Youth Development Organizations and Hip Hop Culture. Students will collaborate on a community-based project or a project that focuses on social change within community settings. making Art in Community ii, mA in Community Arts (mACA), maryland institute College of Art, baltimore, md, jann rosen-Queralt and fletcher mackey (Winter/Spring 2006) 
MACA students will develop artwork that is an outgrowth of their experience working with community, projects developed for Two Way Street and other influences of their choosing. These developments will become the basis for a thesis to be presented at the end of the summer session. Performance and Social Change, university of minnesota, minneapolis, mn, Sonja Kuftinec (Spring 2005)A practical and theoretical exploration of Boal’s work in conversation with those who influenced and critiqued him, in a safe space for student risk-taking where amazing things can happen every week. Brazilian born Augusto Boal has been working for five decades to transform individuals and societies through theater. Believing that everyone has the capacity to act—to take action and reflect on their conditions of being— Boal developed a “theater of the oppressed,” embracing techniques including forum, image, invisible and legislative theater, all designed to raise consciousness and propel action towards individual and social change. Performance and Social Change investigates the possibilities and limitations of Boal’s techniques through workshops, presentations and discussions. Critical and practical readings, impassioned debate and community-based research will dynamize our learning as we explore Boal’s strategies, applying them to our own lives and surroundings. We will do so through a structure that gradually moves us from the safe space we create in the classroom to one you will co-create with communities, always reflecting on our practice as we do so. 
The Curriculum Project Report  8 September 2008 
Professionalism in Community Arts Practice & Community Arts residency ii, mA in Community Arts (mACA), maryland institute College of Art, Krafchek, mcdonagh, & hypki (Winter/Spring 2006) 
MACA students continue to conceive, implement and manage projects and programs that engage community members in meaningful art experiences; document and assess the effectiveness of projects as compared to community needs and expectations; and gain hands-on experience in areas such as project and event planning, community organizing and program management. These real-world experiences are supported by intensive classroom study of community arts-related theory and practice. 
radical Street Performance: Global Perspectives, drama department, new York university, new York, nY, jan Cohen-Cruz (Spring 2005) 
Examination of performances worldwide that take place in public by-ways rather than theatre buildings and that are intended to question or re-envision dominant arrangements of power. We’ll look at street theatrics that take place on large and small scale, support a range of agendas, take on single issues and broad visions and are performed by professional actors or by people driven by a tremendous incentive to change their own reality. The course is organized around five general categories of street performance: agit-prop, witness, integration, utopia, tradition. Each is accompanied by readings, a brief response paper, discussion, videos, as well as an opportunity to try it out at least in class, and in three cases, out in the world: Invisible or semi Invisible Theater, Celebratory Performance and an Election Project using a form of your choice. Students will ally the third performance to a larger context, either by directly partnering their group with an activist group or with one of the national candidates’ local organization. A five page research paper consists of assessing a street performance or demonstration taking place in New York City this semester vis-a-vis both efficacy and aesthetics. A final exam based on class readings concludes the semester’s work. 
re/building Community through the Arts, ron bechet, Xavier university, new orleans, lA, john barnes, dillard university, new orleans, lA, jan Cohen Cruz, new York university, new York, nY, Amy Koritz, Tulane university, new orleans, lA (Spring 2007) 
This class focuses on the theory and practice of community-based arts, civic engagement in higher education and the relationship between art and community development. Students work in teams with local artists on Home, New Orleans?—a multi-disciplinary, art-and-community-development project grounded in selected New Orleans neighborhoods. The Project may take a number of forms, depending on the needs and goals of community partners. One approach begins with research, locating former residents of selected homes in devastated areas to reconstruct the life histories of the homes themselves. We imagine spring boarding from the energy generated around house-history, or other community-based art works—in the form of theatrical performances, music, story-telling, oral histories, art installations and more—to practical steps that help move forward local neighborhood revitalization. The project seeks to celebrate and probe the joys and sorrows of community life pre-Katrina and participate in envisioning and providing creative tools to achieve a better future. The course is grounded in neighborhood arts workshops. These include workshop co-facilitation at a community center, planning for workshops, documenting, fund-raising or doing publicity and marketing for said workshops, and interviews/ story circles material about home. The number of community engagement hours expected of students varies based on home institution: Xavier students/6 hours per week, NYU/9 hours per week, Tulane/4 hours per week, Dillard/3 hours per week. (This course was taught by faculty from four different universities. All participants were in class together. Students were in mixed groups at their mini internship sites, with assignments varying slightly depending on school.) 
research for devising Community-based Performance, drama department, new York university, new York, nY, jan Cohen-Cruz with urban bush Women members & rosemary Quinn (fall 2005) 
Students try out different research methods for making performances and writing essays grounded in local concerns, finding out what is on the minds and hearts of people in a particular place and exploring the broad context of these issues. We do primary research in neighborhoods within an easy walk of NYU. Students investigate how artists enter communities, develop relationships with local people, identify local concerns, deepen research, gather material for the creation of writing and performances, and develop a plan to impact policy. Urban Bush Woman Christal Brown guides performance-based exercises as Cohen-Cruz guides reading discussions and writing assignments. UBW artistic director Jawole Willa Jo Zollar and ETW’s Rosemary Quinn lead master classes in translating research into performance. As the project develops, our 
The Curriculum Project Report 69 September 2008 
research becomes more focused and integrates secondary sources. We also look at models of devised, community-based plays. 
COMMUNITY-BASED PROGRAMS 
Cornerstone Theater Company Summer institutes, los Angeles, CA 
The Cornerstone Institute Summer Residency offers an intense, hands-on collaborative experience creating theater and exploring strategies for community engagement while living with and within a small, diverse community. Students learn both through classroom training and hands-on creation of a community-specific production. Classroom curriculum and production experience combine to provide a thorough understanding of the community collaboration process. The four-week program grows and changes each year responding to input from student participants as well as the unique circumstances of each community and location. The curriculum includes an overview of community-based theatre and Cornerstone’s history; exploring community; theatre, vocal and movement explorations with community members. The text is The Cornerstone Community Collaboration Handbook. resources for Social Change, Alternate rooTS, Atlanta, GA 
This training program of Alternate ROOTS is devoted to teaching, sharing and exchanging ideas, methods and techniques for creating social change through the arts. RSC recognizes the need to institutionalize and pass on the best practices, growing knowledge and diverse skills gained as ROOTS members work in communities. Its core method of teaching is the development of partnerships between artists and communities and partnerships within communities leading to the empowerment of individuals and communities involved. RSC uses the arts as tools or search engines in collaborative projects that aim to provoke lasting change and turn community goals into long-term community solutions. Guided by principles of power, partnership, transformation, dialogue, aesthetics, RSC programs are tailored to each community, with flexible timeframes. No two workshops are alike: the learning exchange may be a one-day workshop or meeting, a residency or several working sessions and artist residencies over time. urban bush Women Summer institutes, brooklyn, nY 
The purpose of this 10-day Summer Institute is to connect concert professionals and community-based artists together in a learning experience to better maximize the possibilities of the arts as a vehicle for social activism and civic engagement. The Institute draws a cross-section of participants from across the country, the UK, Caribbean and Canada. The 2008 Summer Institute focuses on Collaboration, Leadership and Art making, creating site-specific performances that engage in public dialogues regarding this year’s theme, Are We Democracy? In addition to daily dance and conditioning classes, there are workshops on Asset Mapping; Creating Public Dialogues; Principles of Effective Community Organizing; Generating Choreography, Text and Music; and Undoing Racism, presented by the People’s Institute for Survival and Beyond, New Orleans. liz lerman dance exchange Summer institutes, Takoma Park, md 
Week-long intensive dance workshops informed by an online toolbox designed for anyone seeking concrete techniques for choreography, community building and constructive human interaction, including artists, educators, students, social service professionals. Appalachian media institute, Appalshop, Whitesburg, KY 
Through AMI, young people in central Appalachia learn how to use video cameras and audio equipment to document the unique traditions and complex issues of their mountain communities. AMI offers a 10-week intensive summer institute and year-round media production training with youth, teachers and community groups in central Appalachia. AMI’s goals are to develop the critical and creative skills of young people in central Appalachia and to involve them in their communities and the world by making and sharing media. Sojourn Theatre one-Week Summer institute, Portland, or 
The 2008 6-day Institute for adults working in theatre, education and community settings was on Devising Civic Theatre: Performance, Social Practice & Dialogue, offering participants an opportunity to explore the techniques and strategies Sojourn Theatre artistic director Michael Rohd uses in collaborative work with groups to devise performance material, build community, examine the potential of site-specific activity and explore social and political issues through collaborative conceptual, improvisational and physical investigations. 
The Curriculum Project Report  0 September 2008 
APPendiX: CAll for eXCellenCe 
A Call for excellence in Community Cultural development Curriculum in higher education 
from Dudley Cocke, Roadside Theater/Appalshop; Jan Cohen-Cruz, Imagining America; and Arlene Goldbard, writer and community cultural development consultant A Singular moment of opportunity 
We are three writers, practitioners, teachers, theorists and critics of community cultural development practice. “Community cultural development” (also called “community arts,” “community-based arts,” “community engagement through the arts,” “arts-based community development” and “art and social change”) describes a range of initiatives undertaken by artists in collaboration with other community members to express identity, concerns and aspirations through the arts and communications media, while building cultural capacity and contributing to social change. We’ve come together because we recognize a unique moment of opportunity in our field of practice. Four circumstances have converged to produce this opportunity: 
 A critical mass of analytic writing and documentation has accrued, bringing new attention to cultural development theories and practices that have been gathering force over the last four decades; 
 In the past ten years, universities across the U.S. have created dozens of individual courses, certificates and degree programs in community cultural development. (Communityarts.net lists 32 degree programs and 31 non-degree programs with relevance to community cultural development); 
 Unprecedented numbers of students are matriculating in these programs, creating an unusual opportunity to affect the field by affecting their education; and 
 More and more, social-justice activists are collaborating with artists and cultural workers to bring cultural awareness into their efforts, understanding that culture is an essential foundation for community development and social change. At the same time, artists are increasingly seeking intersectoral partnerships for their work. 
Together, we three have aggregate experience of community arts amounting to nearly a century. We’ve chosen to work together on this project because we believe our complementary skills and experience uniquely prepare us to address community cultural development’s distinctive educational needs. Each of us has a depth of field experience, with a strong track record in community-based arts, community engagement and social change organizing. Dudley has long occupied a bridging role through his writing and speaking from an artist’s point of view, bringing the news of diverse American communities to policymakers and resource providers; Jan is also strongly grounded in academic culture and practice; and Arlene is recognized as an expert in both organizational development and cultural policy as they pertain to the field. 
Common Concerns and needs 
Over the last year or so, each of us has been in even closer contact with the higher education aspect of the community cultural development field. Dudley and Jan have collaborated in community arts projects involving New York University, as well as Dillard, Xavier and Tulane universities, working intensively with students, faculty, artists and community organizers. Arlene has offered talks, classes and workshops at many colleges in support of her new book, New Creative Community: The Art of Cultural Development, using these opportunities to confer with many of those involved in newly developing programs. 
What we’ve seen is a growing academic presence for community cultural development, but one with cross-cutting shortcomings and overarching needs: 
balancing disciplinary training and community work. Faculty members report great difficulty in balancing the need for students to have hands-on experience beyond the classroom with coursework that imparts training in arts techniques. Often, the departments that house these new programs are committed to a style of aesthetic training shaped for the student seeking a mainstream professional life in the arts; some resist acknowledging the equal need for training in community engagement methods and approaches. Even 
The Curriculum Project Report 7  September 2008 
for faculty members who have long and deep community engagement experience, trying to find room for this work in the curriculum can be like trying to pour new wine into old bottles that are already filled to the brim. 
Curricular inadequacies. Many of the new programs take a piecemeal approach to community cultural development education, largely shaped by pre-existing departmental requirements and the particular strengths of the faculty members whose enthusiasm and commitment has brought these programs into being. Field experience may be emphasized in one place, coursework in another, but the two are seldom fully integrated. Many faculty members lack an appropriate depth of community engagement experience to guide students into a deep and effective practice in the service of social justice. 
It appears that few of the existing programs provides adequate grounding in the larger cultural and social context for the work, such as required courses in cultural policy, social psychology, applied ethics, theory of social change or organizational behavior. Indeed, as focus differs from program to program, there is no consensus as to what constellation of courses would provide adequate grounding. Although the idea of moving across departmental lines to bring together diverse content and modes of learning is often appealing, even universities that have the needed range of courses typically find it difficult to break out of specialized “silos.” 
A larger context of meaning. As presently constituted, university programs often elide questions of deeper meaning, overlooking their motivating power in students’ lives. Indeed, many students find their way to this work through their search for meaning. Sometimes that search is grounded in a formal spiritual tradition: Islam’s zakah and Judaism’s tzedakah both imply charity and restorative justice; a core concept of Judaism is tikkun olam (repairing the world); the tenets of Christian liberation theology entwine justice and mercy; and three elements of Buddhism’s eightfold path focus on right speech, action, and livelihood. 
Others find meaning in a humanist context. For some, it may be environmental action grounded in reverence for the earth; for others, it may be working with elders or other groups out of the conviction that their marginalization diminishes everyone. Students are frequently delighted to discover that in community cultural development work, they can conjoin their passion for the arts with other powerful callings. In this spirit, community cultural development offers them experiences of deep listening, open-hearted collaboration, and action for social healing which are, in effect, non-specific forms of spiritual practice. As the Vietnamese Buddhist teacher Thich Nat Hanh has pointed out, “There are many groups of young people who are strongly motivated by the desire for social action, but because they don’t know how to take good care of themselves, they don’t know how to live and work with harmony among themselves, they give up the struggle after some time.” 
Community-campus relationships. Based on our informal survey of the field, most existing university programs are challenged to some degree in finding truly equitable and effective ways of working with community partners, so that different types of knowledge are valued and both students and community group members feel their collaborations are useful and satisfying. While in recent years colleges have broadened their use of service-learning and other forms of campus-community collaboration, many have not fully incorporated community cultural development’s informing values of pluralism, participation and equity. As a result, community work is often superficial, and doesn’t offer students the opportunity to have a real social justice impact. 
Parameters 
These cross-cutting weaknesses in existing community cultural development higher education programs suggest some of the required elements of curricular excellence: 
integration of theory and practice. Excellence requires a balance of community engagement, training in both aesthetics and community organizing, and scholarship focusing on the field’s history and animating ideas, as well as the economic and policy environments for it. Inspired by Rev. James Lawson, a hero of the 1960s civil rights movement, our language reflects that justice must be governed by an emphasis on caring, or love. Or, as Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., put it, “Darkness cannot drive out darkness; only light can do that. Hate cannot drive out hate; only love can do that.” As depicted in the following diagram, an integrated curriculum will be most meaningful and effective if all three elements constantly interact, receiving equal emphasis in the service of this inspiring goal: 
The Curriculum Project Report  2 September 2008 
recognition of multiple types of knowledge. Training for community arts work can’t take place within the university as ivory tower. More than in many other fields of learning, community cultural development educators must seek and value non-academic learning to complement, enrich and complete coursework, collaborating with practicing community artists and community organizers in ways that acknowledge their essential equality with on-campus instructors. 
Cultivation of social entrepreneurship skills. Excellent community cultural development practice requires several types of skill: the ability to effectively read complex social landscapes and situations, personal flexibility, and developed abilities to improvise, reflect, respond and self-correct. Cultivating such skills calls on faculty to transcend conventional educational approaches that treat the professor as an expert and the student as a client, rather than as co-participants in an iterative process of study, action and reflection. In essence, form follows function in community arts education, requiring training to employ the same methods as effective practice. 
useful interventions 
We believe that several types of strategic intervention would greatly benefit the developing field at this formative moment. University leaders in community cultural development need more knowledge of history, theory and practice, and more opportunities for dialogue, collaboration and higher-level training (i.e., training the trainers). The particular interventions that will be most needed and welcomed will emerge from our dialogue with educators, students and practitioners; the ideas listed below are intended to suggest possible approaches. 
model Curriculum Project. Curricula will differ from institution to institution because many schools and departments are still discipline-specific, have access to varying levels of resources, or educate students for particular career aims, such as working in prison reform or child development. But to be effective, all must integrate training, scholarship and community engagement, as described above. Because the most effective training would combine doing and reflection, courses could not be seen as distinct modules, but rather as a sequence of interrelated activities propelling each student toward a degree. 
The design of a model curriculum project would begin with a survey of existing programs here and abroad, underpinned by conversations with students, faculty, administration and leaders of collaborating community organizations. The resulting report and proposal would yield a set of standards to be circulated in draft throughout the field and discussed at the conference described in the next section. Ideally, resources would be secured to assist university programs in improving their own curricula in line with the project’s guidance, for example, by underwriting expert consultation to guide them. 
Community Cultural development Conference. We see several ways this initiative could work: as a series of intensive conversations focused by topic, as regional gatherings and as a major national convening. In regional terms, some sections of the U.S. have clusters of developing programs. For instance, at Philadelphia’s Temple University, a core curriculum is being developed for the Cross-Disciplinary Arts in Community Program at Tyler School of Art, eventually leading to a degree program; Moore College of Art, the University of the Arts and Drexel University have added one or two community arts courses with an eye toward building gradually. Bringing key faculty, administrators and students together with community-based practitioners and visiting experts could stimulate the learning dialogue needed to optimize these programs. Similarly, relevant programs are developing at Columbia College Chicago, the Chicago Art Institute and the University of Illinois at Chicago, and in other regional clusters. Similarly, educators and practitioners from 
The Curriculum Project Report 7  September 2008 
disparate regions may benefit from coming together for reflection and planning around specific topics, such as community cultural development and neighborhood revitalization. 
Nationally, an opportunity exists similar to a 1988 initiative in museum practice, when the Rockefeller Foundation focused its considerable influence on intercultural relations and multicultural development. Its Arts and Humanities Division cosponsored two major conferences with the Smithsonian Institution on “The Poetics and Politics of Representation,” highlighting museum practices in exhibiting non-European cultures. Exhibiting Cultures, the 1991 Smithsonian Institution Press volume that emerged from these gatherings, is still considered one of the most influential texts, widely used in museum-education and curatorial-training programs. It has increased the cultural sensitivity of museum practice and legitimated important voices that have influenced the field. A national conference that brought together community artists, faculty members, administrators, students and community activists could similarly generate a consensus on best practices in training, conceivably formalized in a similar volume of essays. 
Community Cultural development institute. We also see at least two ways to instigate this intervention. To start with, a traveling institute might be best: equipping experienced practitioners and teachers with model curriculum materials, then bringing them to a series of colleges currently planning, initiating or piloting such programs. On each campus, institute trainers could work with local faculty, administrators, students, artists and collaborating community organizations to devise model action research projects, enabling deep learning through simultaneous study and action. Tailored to the needs of each institution, the model might be a single intensive period of hands-on work (e.g., a month’s residency by institute trainers with provision for follow-up consultation), or a series of visits (e.g., shorter on-site periods at the beginning, middle and end of the school year, with provision for check-ins between visits). 
In the longer term, an ongoing institute could provide teachers and practitioners with a place to take courses, engage in projects, conduct research and consider critical questions for the field in a timely manner. As both a think tank and a home for continuing professional education, such an institute would be a tremendous asset to a field poised to realize its full potential. 
next Steps 
There is no shortage of ideas and enthusiasm in this evolving field. But as in all periods of rapid development, without the right kind of support, what could be a promising direction may wind up as a dead end, with creative and democratic impulses co-opted toward status quo ends. 
We are prepared to invest a great deal of care and energy in strategic interventions like those sketched above. We are seeking a wise partner to house these efforts, helping to bring resources and attention to an opportunity ripe for the picking. As we envisage it, the ideal partner would be a center or institute, perhaps with academic affiliation, but willing and able to work equitably with many types of collaborators. 
We are eager to talk. Please contact us: arlene@arlenegoldbard.com, jcohencr@syr.edu, roadsidetheater@verizon.net. Spring, 2007 
The Curriculum Project Report 7  September 2008
﻿See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228612810 
Higher education and economic development in Africa: The case of Cameroon 
Article in Educational Research and Reviews · April 2009 
CITATIONS 
READS 6 
1,149 
2 authors: 
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects: 
George Epah Fonkeng University of Yaounde I 
7 PUBLICATIONS 13 CITATIONS 
SEE PROFILE 
Augustin Ntembe Bowie State University 
7 PUBLICATIONS 26 CITATIONS 
SEE PROFILE 
Journal of Economics and Economic Education Research View project 
Journal of Economics and Finance View project 
All content following this page was uploaded by Augustin Ntembe on 11 July 2014. 
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. 
Educational Research and Review Vol. 4 (5), pp. 231-246, May 2009 Available online at http://www.academicjournals.org/ERR ISSN 1990-3839  2009 Academic Journals 
Full Length Research Paper 
Higher education and economic development in Africa: The case of Cameroon 
George E. Fonkeng1* and Augustine N. Ntembe2 
1The University of Yaounde I B.P. 755 Yaounde Cameroon Tel: (237) 77 86 22 39. 2The University of Buea B.P. 158 Buea Cameroon Tel: (237) 77 53 11 31 
Accepted 23 May, 2009 
This study investigates the actual and potential impact of higher education on the development of Cameroon. Using household survey data from the first Cameroon household survey, we analyze the effect of education attainment on earnings and private returns to education. The econometric work uses Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) to estimate earning equations for full time workers across educational levels. The results confirm a relatively high premium on higher education. In effect, an additional year of schooling is expected to increase earnings implying that individual investment in education is profitable. However, the private returns to post secondary education are greater for men than for women. Next, we use the short-cut method to estimate social returns to investments in higher education. The results equally show that social returns to higher education are quite substantial but are also higher for women than for men. Finally, we determine the link between higher education measured with enrollment and gross domestic product as a proxy for national income. The findings reveal positive and significant relationship between higher education and economic growth. The study concludes that higher education plays an important role in the development process of Cameroon and that this role can be enhanced provided measures are taken to improve the efficiency of the higher education system, improve equity in attainment and ensure greater professionalism of academic programs. The study also underscores the need to reduce inequity in the distribution of benefits from higher education in Cameroon. 
Key words: Higher education, economic development, estimates, university, enrollment, employment, Cameroon. 
INTRODUCTION 
At independence, higher education in Cameroon like in many other African countries was viewed as a vehicle for training high level manpower for the new nation to consolidate its autonomy and as a driving force for the nation’s economic development (Comité Ttechnique de Réflexion pour l”Amelioration du System Nationale de L”Enseignement Supérieure, Rapport, Avril, 2004). To achieve these goals, the government of Cameroon devoted a large share of its budget to the expansion of education including higher education. The expansion in higher education was motivated by the conviction that it was a benchmark for the training of manpower at lower levels of education and was an important source of economic growth. 
The interest in the growth effect of education dates 
*Corresponding author E-mail: fonkengepah@yahoo.fr 
back to the time of Adam Smith when he made his inquiry into the wealth of nations. However, it was not until the 1960s that economists attempted to study the link between education and economic growth (Saxton 2000). The pioneering works of Becker (1964), Schultz (1961), and Denison (1985) provided a new link between education and economic growth. Early estimates of economic growth with the application of the growth accounting often resulted in a large residual indicating a change in output that was not accounted for by the explanatory variables. This shortcoming in the estimation of economic growth was resolved with the introduction of human capital into growth accounting (Jorgenson and Griliches, 1967) and the development of endogenous growth models (Lucas, 1988; Romer. 1986). 
Higher education contributes to economic development through the creation and dissemination of knowledge. Higher education also enables those who have acquired 
232 Educ. Res. Rev. 
it to become more productive thus contributing to the overall economic growth. Investments in higher education provides benefits to the individual and such benefits include higher wages, which may lead to better health and improved quality of life. Although no empirical evidence on the link between higher education in Cameroon and economic development has yet been established, there is little doubt that higher education indeed plays a key role in the development process of the country. Higher earnings for highly educated individuals for example help to raise tax revenue for the state and the society at large. 
The interest manifested by the government of Cameroon to expand higher education relented during the crisis and adjustment decade of the mid-1980s through 1993, a period characterized by cutbacks in government expenditures resulting to shortages in resources available for investment in education. The lack of sufficient resources to invest in the sector and the inefficiency in the allocation of scarce resources was reflected in the fall in the internal efficiency of the system and the general fall in standards. The rise in the number of unemployed graduates combined with limited professionalism of higher education in the country has raised questions on its usefulness and relevance. 
This study will evaluate the contribution of higher education to economic development by estimating private and social returns to investments in various levels of education. We shall also use simple regression to examine the causal link between higher education and economic growth by regressing an indicator of education attainment on economic growth. Thus the study will employ the standard Mincerian wage earning function (Mincer, 1974), to estimate private returns to higher education in Cameroon and then apply the elaborate method to analyze social returns. The former is intended to determine the private profitability of higher education while the latter is intended to assess public profitability. 
RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND QUESTIONS 
The central objective of the study is to investigate the potential and actual impact of higher education in Cameroon’s development process and identify ways to enhance that impact. Specifically, the study seeks to: 
establish a causal link between higher education and economic development, investigate the private and public levels of profitability of higher education in Cameroon, determine the cost of higher education in Cameroon and who is bearing it, verify enquire whether higher education policy in Cameroon promotes social equity. 
The study will seek to provide answers to the following questions: Is there a link between education and development? How profitable is higher education in Cameroon? What is the cost of higher education in Cameroon in par
ticular? Does higher education policy in Cameroon promote social equity? 
THE STATE OF HIGHER EDUCATION IN CAMEROON 
Pre-university education in Cameroon lasts for approximately 13 years distributed as follows: 6 years of primary education, 5 years of secondary education and 2 years of upper secondary education. However, not all students can afford nursery education and it is not compulsory in Cameroon. Higher education in Cameroon consists of various forms of educational institutions beyond high school education. These institutions include conventional universities which offer courses in both the sciences and humanities, polytechnics which provide advanced vocationnal training, professional schools for management, public administration, and higher teacher training. (Some universities example, The university of Douala offers courses in engineering). 
The development of higher education in the country dates back to June 1962 when the Federal University of Cameroon was created. The university began in September 1962 with a student enrollment of 600, all Registered in the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, the Faculty of Science, and the Faculty of Law and Economics. In addition to the three faculties, specialized schools or the grandes écoles attached to the university and other professional institutions of higher learning were created to prepare graduates for professional careers. Particularly prominent among these specialized institutions attached to the university were the school of medicine (CUSS) created in 1969, the Institute of International Relations (IRIC), the school of engineering (ENSP) created in 1971 and the School of Journalism (ESIJY) created in 1970. 
The rise in student enrollment and the desire to decongest the university, led to the creation of the university center for languages, translation and interpretation in Buea; the university center for Agriculture in Dschang; the university center for Business studies and training of technical teachers in Douala; the university center for Food Science and Food Technology in Ngaoundere in 1977. 
Specialized schools not attached to the university such as the school of public works (ENSTP), the military academy (EMIA), the school of administration (ENAM), were also created. Unlike the university where entrance was based on a pass at the general certificate of education examination at advanced level for English speaking students or the baccalaureate for French speaking students, entrance into the specialized institutes and other professional schools not attached to the university is competitive. 
The expansion in student enrollment, and eventual congestion in the University of Yaounde, in addition to other social and political exigencies led to the university reforms in 1993 which saw the splitting of the lone university into six independent state universities. The reforms led to the suspension of stipends and called for the invol
Yusuf and Yusuf 233 
Table 1. Student Enrollment in Universities 1992/1993 and 2002/2003. 
Year Buea Douala Dschang Ngaoundere Yaounde I Yaounde II Total state 
universities CUCA Overall 
Total 1992/1993 790 1666 1899 776 25157 13279 42791 130 42921 1993/1994 1984 4782 1820 789 19625 9585 38585 378 38963 1994/1995 3324 7475 2559 1286 17798 9053 41495 588 42083 1995/1996 4185 7301 3779 1264 15969 6780 39278 678 39956 1996/1997 4219 8424 4300 1526 13988 6553 39010 789 39799 1997/1998 4511 9744 7007 2039 19308 7598 50207 926 51133 1998/1999 5062 11376 8776 3082 21257 10661 60214 1130 61344 1999/2000 5834 8847 10518 3424 19459 11198 59280 1237 60517 20002001 6112 10786 11291 4695 20167 10084 63135 1291 64426 2001/2002 6519 10326 11656 6938 22889 12763 71091 .. 72465 2002/2003 7282 12316 10321 7407 22065 14714 74105 .. 75471 
Source: NIS and Statistical Yearbook of the Ministry of Higher Education, (2005) 
vement of other external stakeholders in the financing and management of higher education thus introducing some form of privatization. Private higher education institutions particularly vocational and professional institutions have been authorized to operate and are expanding rapidly although a number of them especially universities are yet to be legalized. Today, with the creation and opening of the University of Maroua (1998), there are in total seven state universities in Cameroon. 
Evolution of student enrollment 
The student enrollment which was only 600 in 1962 increased steadily to 29 990 students in the 1989/1990 school year and by 2002/2003 (Table 1), total enrollment in the universities was estimated at 75,471 students. The steady rise in the student enrollment into the universities and their affiliated professional institutions since the creation of the Federal University in 1962 to 1994 is explained by the fact that higher education was free for everyone who became qualified to enroll into the university. The high demand for places into the university was also motivated by allowances that were given to students depending on their performances. However, entrance into university centers and other specialized institutions of higher education was competitive and based on the openings available in the public service for those who were admitted. 
The dramatic growth in student enrollment to 39,187 at the University of Yaounde was not accompanied by any increase in infrastructure resulting in overcrowded lecture halls and other facilities. This rendered lectures difficult staff-student ratio. The high enrollment equally over-stressed the equipment for laboratory and library. All these contributed to the inefficiency of the system as they affected student motivation and performance. Although data on the internal efficiency of higher education in Cameroon is limited, by the end of 1980, 1500 students were graduating each year from the university representing a 
completion rate of 30% (Ngwana, 2003). The rather poor internal efficiency of the system can be attributed to inadequate recruitment of lecturers, over-crowding of lecture halls, and inadequate infrastructure amongst others. 
Higher education and labor market participation 
Despite the rise in student enrollment into institutions of higher education in Cameroon since the 1960s and rising number of graduates from the universities, the employment of these graduates has been a serious problem. The curriculum designed in the 1960s were severely inadequate for private sector demands during the 1990s. This coupled with the inability of the government to absorb graduates into the public service has exacerbated the problem of unemployment. This is explained by the fact that the skills acquired from higher education were grossly inadequate for the requirement of the labour market leading to de-motivation of those aspiring to pursue studies at higher levels. The picture becomes clearer if we examine labour market participation using data drawn from the second Cameroon Household Survey (ECAM II). From the survey information, a large proportion of the active population estimated at two thirds of the total had only primary education or less. A bulk of the graduates from higher and ineffective. The recruitment of staff was not commensurate to the rise in student enrollment leading to a low education was less competitive in the job market given that they had pursued general education without specific relevant skills (Lachaud 1996) (Lachaud’s observation is based on the first or the 1996 Cameroon Household Survey data. This observation still holds when one looks at the report on employment from the second Cameroon Household Survey data). Econometric studies show that those holding technical and professional diplomas were more likely to get secured employment (Lauchaud, 1996; ECAM II, Report on Employment, 2001). 
234 Educ. Res. Rev. 
Table 2. Active population distributed by level of education in percentage. 
Sex Less than a year Primary Secondary Higher Unknown Total 30.9 36.3 28.3 4.3 0.2 Males 22.7 37.6 33.2 6.4 0.1 Females 39.5 34.9 23.1 2.2 0.3 
Source : Les statistiques sur l’emploi et le marché du travail au Cameroun, Yaoundé. Bureau International du Travail (BIT) 2004 
The conceptual links from higher education to economic development 
Higher education is an important form of human capital investment. It has the potential of being the driving force of economic development in Africa. In fact, Castells (1994), describes it as the “engine of development in the new world economy”. Higher education does not only enable those with such capital to earn higher, it also contributes to economic growth. Higher education affects the participation of individuals in economic activities and the overall economic development; it contributes in the development of human capital by expanding the size and skills of the work force. Higher levels of education are accompanied by higher wages, lower unemployment probabilities and higher labour participation rates. It also increases the returns and consequently the productivity of workers (Since wages are often seen as reflecting marginal labour productivity, this implies that the link between higher education and wages can be used to analyze the productivity effects of higher education) ( Psacharopoulos, 1994 ; Todaro, 1989 ; Mingat and Tan, 1996 ; Gallup et al., 1998). Thus higher education provides knowledge and professional skills capable of contributing significantly to the growth of the economy. 
Second, higher education and especially universities promotes economic development through the production and dissemination of new knowledge (Rosa, 2002). It expands technological capacities and enhances progressive innovations that are required in a more competitive global economy. The creation of new technological knowledge through research and innovations can create more employment, promote capital formation and create surpluses for reinvestment and can in turn lead the development of human resources (ADB, 1998, p. 195). New research creates new openings, jobs and new wealth which expand the economy. Once knowledge is created, it becomes possible for it to be transferred and disseminated through out the economy so that it is almost assumed to be a public good due to its non-excludability and nonrivalry characteristics. 
Third, higher education can well play the role of a basic income generating industry. Universities generate revenues from sponsored research, tuition, support services and state appropriations which help to provide jobs and pay for services in the community. Sponsored research enables researchers in universities to bring to their com
munities money that would not have been earned in its absence. Higher education can spare a community from costs such as unemployment, declining welfare and crime. Services provided by the community to universities generate income that helps in improving lives and economic development. Lastly, higher education offers the society with both cultural and political benefits (TFHES 2000). It creates attitudes and causes attitudes necessary for the socialization of individuals. Higher education enhances democracy and good governance by producing higher quality administrative personnel that can manage economic development. 
The assumptions that higher education is not important in the economic development process of African countries have been reinforced by findings by Psacharopoulos (1988) and Pritchett (1996) who used cross national econometric measures and theories to emphasize investment in basic education. The author used two sets of data on the educational attainment of the labor force to show the growth of education capital per worker has no association with the growth rate of output per worker. They attributed the negative impact of education in developing countries to a combination of defective schooling, greater supply than demand for education and rent-seeking behavior of the educated elite. Psacharopoulos and Patrinos (2002) showed that the social rates of return to investment in primary education are the highest, followed by secondary education and are least for higher education. Contrarily to the view that higher education does not contribute to growth in Africa, there is much evidence that education indeed affects economic growth. Shultz (1981) argues based on empirical evidence that investment in education that results in human capital accumulation is critical for economic growth. Similarly, Barro (1991) conducted a survey on 98 countries and concluded that there is a strong relationship between schooling enrollment and economic growth. 
Tilak (1986) also reached similar conclusions in a study on the relation between schooling and growth on Pakistan and South Korea. Lin (2004) investigates the effects of higher education curricula on labor force and consequently on economic growth in Taiwan over the period running from 1965 2000. The study’s findings reveal that higher education through four disciplines: humanities, engineering and science, business and social sciences, and agricultural sciences overall provide a positive and significant effect of higher education stock which is 
Yusuf and Yusuf 235 
Table 3. Returns to Higher Education (percentage). Region Social Private Primary Secondary Higher Primary Secondary Higher Asia* 16.2 11.1 11.0 20.0 15.8 18.2 Europe/Middle Africa East/North 
15.6 9.7 9.9 13.8 13.6 18.8 
Latin America/Caribbean 17.4 12.9 12.3 26.6 17.0 19.5 OECD 8.5 9.4 8.5 13.4 11.3 11.6 Sub-Sahara Africa 25.4 18.4 11.3 37.6 24.6 27.8 World average 18.9 13.1 10.3 26.6 17.0 19.0 
Source: Psacharopoulos and Patrinos (2002). *Non-OECD 
associated with an increase in real output. 
Although the social and private returns to higher education are less than that of primary education, it should nevertheless be noted that higher education does yield an attractive rate of return in Sub-Saharan Africa (11.3%) and to the individual as well (27.8%) as shown in Table 3 below. 
When the returns to education are compared across the various subsets of the population in Africa, one finds that the rate of returns for women is slightly higher than for man. In a study using a sample of countries across the world, Psacharopoulos (1994, 1329 Table 3) showed that the average rate of return for males is 11.3% which is about 1.3% point lesser than for females. Psacharopoulos and Patrinos (2002) estimated the rate of returns for women at 9.8 percent compared to 8.7% for males. Estimates obtained for Ghana and Cote d’Ivoire generally show no substantial differences both sexes. 
In the case of Cameroon, studies on the returns to investment in education are scarce. Tafah Edokat (1998) studied private returns to investment in education in Cameroon and concluded that returns to education in Cameroon are positive and in some cases higher than investment in other sectors of the economy. His study revealed that primary education gives highest returns followed by secondary and higher education. Like Psacharopoulos (1994), he concluded that investments in primary education and those willing to pursue higher education should be made to bear a greater proportion of such education. 
In a more recent study, Amin and Awung (2005) analyzed private returns to investment in education in Cameroon. The study which was based on survey data from five provinces of the country found that in contrast to Tafah-Edokat ‘s (1998) findings, the returns to investment in education increased from lower to higher levels. In addition, returns to investment in education were higher at higher levels than at lower levels. The results from these two studies in Cameroon indicate that the patterns of returns The to World education Bank at study, the different “Can Africa levels Claim remain the inclusive. 
21st Century”, maintains that economic growth cannot be sustain
ed except with literacy rates of over 50% and that the consequences of the low secondary and university education may be particularly critical in Africa. The study insists that universities have a potentially greater role to play in Africa than in many other regions because universities are the only institutions with manpower, skills, equipment and the mandate to generate new knowledge through research and adapt global knowledge to help resolve local problems. 
HIGHER EDUCATION AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN CAMEROON 
Empirical analysis 
This study does not estimate the production function augmented with human capital but rather examines the causal relation between income per capita and higher education attainment. GDP is measured with 1995 constant prices as a proxy for income and education attainment is measured with enrolment into higher education institutions in Cameroon. Enrollment into higher education in Cameroon has expanded substantially since 1962 indicating an overall expansion in the higher education system. The stock of working age population with higher education is an important indicator of the extent of the development of the sector and represents the efforts made by the Government of Cameroon since the past years to expand higher education. This indicator is important because the stock of working age population with higher education forms a large part of the skilled and educated workforce. The growth in overall output will be higher, the higher the stock of population with skilled labour. 
Using data on Cameroon from 1965 2002, to regress constant GDP on enrollment, the trend line in Figure 2 indicates that the regression coefficient is positive and statistically significant at one percent level showing a strong relationship between higher education and national income. The positive slope of the trend line depicted in the Figure shows in effect that higher education attainment enhances the growth of national income. 
The estimated equation as well as the trend line clearly 
236 Educ. Res. Rev. 
Employee wages 
A and salaries 
Institutional expenditures on 
Multiplier goods and services 
Effects 
Expenditures by students and parents 
Enhanced educational attainment 
Direct impact 
A Direct impact 
B Benefits to individuals and 
society 
C Knowledge creation 
D 
Ultimate outcomes 
Figure 1. Conceptual Framework. Source: Seidman L. M. (2005). Research Institute, W. P. Carey School of Business, Arizona State University. 
indicates that higher education has a significant and positive contribution to output and it may be inadmissible to minimise this role. It may be argued that simple regression of gross national output on higher education only suggest a correlation between the two and necessarily not a cause and effect relationship. Since a time lag is allowed for higher education to cause increases in output, the argument is uncalled for. 
The fact that higher education contributes to econo
D 
Aggregate income 
Economic development 
B 
Quality of job and business creation C Individual income enhancement 
Spillovers to other 
workers 
Income Non-monetary 
from research Knowledge and discovery 
societal benefits Innovation, technology and product development 
mic development growth gained grounds in the theoretical growth literature only recently. Human capital represented here by higher education is considered as an input into production. Although, our study did not do this, it recognized the role of HE as an input into the production function. If this is the case, then there exists a correlation between the two which gives us an approximate relationship between them. 
The results have shown a strong and positive rela
Yusuf and Yusuf 237 
GDP 3000 
2500 
y = 22.061x + 1083.7 
R 2 = 0.5665 
0 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 
Student Enrollment 
Figure 2. Relationship between Higher Education and National Income. 
tionship between higher education and national income which indicates that higher education contributes to output growth. Since Higher Education plays an important role in the economic development of Cameroon. Government needs to put in place economic policy strategies that (or with the potential to) can create jobs to enable graduates to use the skills acquired through human capital investments which will in turn engender output growth. 
THE PROFITABILITY OF HIGHER EDUCATION IN CAMEROON 
Private profitability 
The Mincerian wage regression model: In order to investigate the profitability of higher education in Cameroon, we shall employ a variant of the Mincerian earning functions (Mincer 1974) to estimate the rates of return to higher education. The Mincerian equation is simply the regression of the natural logarithm of wages on the years of education and experience. The standard form of the Mincer wage regression is denoted by: 
)(Wln i ++= ββ 0 i1 S β 2 Exp i + β 3 Exp i 2+ μ i(3.1) 
Where W is the annual wage rate, S is years of schoolling; Exp2 Exp is 2000 1500 
1000 
500 
is potential years of labour market experience, its square. Assuming that there are no direct costs of schooling, the of years of schooling in the wage regression can be interpreted as the average rate of return to an additional year of education, regardless of the level of schooling (Pscharopoulos, 1994). The error term 
μ represents the variation in wages not captured by the right-hand-side variables. The specification in (1) is based on the assumptions that (i ) all individuals have the same access to credits (ii) the correlation between genetic endowment and human capital are zero and education is measured without errors (Mwabu and Schutlz, 2000). 
In our present study, we capture the effect of higher education by converting the continuous years of schoolling variable into a series of dummy variables representing the completion of the different levels of education: primary, secondary, and higher education levels as follows: 
)(Wln 
i += ββ 0 1 Prim i + β 2 Sec i + β 3 HEduc i + β 4 Exp i + β 5 Exp i 2+ β i6 
X + μ i(3.2) 
Where, the βs represent the parameters to be estimated. These parameters with the exclusion of β6 represent the technology by which education and labour market experience are transformed into skills. If we are interested in the different types of curriculum within a given educational level, these dummies can represent them as well. The model is augmented with a variety of other explanatory variables (X) particularly gender, (Temple 2000). 
The coefficient on the variables for education in equation (1) above are often interpreted as the returns to the level of education (Cohen and House 1994). 
However, the coefficient on education will not be equal to the proper return to education for a number of reasons including the fact that there is a direct cost of education other than the opportunity cost. This explains why this coefficient is referred to as the Mincerian return to education. Nevertheless, from the extended earnings function expressed in equation (2), dummies rather than years of 
238 Educ. Res. Rev. 
schooling are used so that the rate of return to a given level of education is derived as: 
R prim = β Sprim prim 
, 
R sec = ββ SS 
sec 
sec 
− −prim , 
R prim = 
β univ − −β sec (3.3) 
where S is the number of years of schooling of the respective educational level and β prim , β sec , and β univ represent the estimated coefficients for primary, seconddary and higher levels of completed education respectively. (Note that nursery education is not considered as it is not compulsory and wastage is not also taken into consideration). For instance to calculate the rate of return for secondary education, Sprim will be six years, and Ssec will be six plus seven years to give thirteen years for the case of mated Cameroon average so number that Ssec of Syears prim will of be higher 7 years. The estieducation in Cameroon as applied in the study is seventeen years. 
Since the sample consists of individuals in the working age (16 65 years who are full time employees (A fulltime worker is one works the required hours of work and for all days as defined by the employer except when on leave or away for official reasons. This definition excludes those who are self-employed and those working on parttime basis. This distinction and application helps in reducing measurement errors in the earnings for those who are not full time workers), a worker’s experience is defined as his/her age (A) minus six years and the number of years of schooling. This method of estimating the rate of return is based on a number of simplifying assumptions of which the key ones are that all individuals start school at six although some individuals may start at an earlier age and that individuals get employed immediately after completing school. This may be a strong assumption in the case of women and youths who are not well represented in the labor market due to either discrimination in the case of women and scarcity in jobs for young school graduates. 
Methodological issues in estimating the returns to higher education: The estimation of the effect of higher education on wages may suffer from some difficulties. Particularly of concern is the omission of relevant variables in the earnings equation. The omission of relevant variables such as ability and family background is a serious setback because this can lead to biased estimates of the conventional OLS estimates. This is because when a proxy for ability is included in the regression, this tends to lower the estimated returns indicating that OLS estimates are biased upwards. If the differences in ability for example were observable to the researcher, they could be accounted for in the statistical analysis. However, characteristics of the individual such as ability are difficult to observe and this is a serious difficulty as ability is likely to correlate positively with education and wages. 
univ sec univ S 
S 
Several approaches have been used to deal with such problems. One approach consists of estimating the effect of schooling on two identical individuals (twins). The basic idea is that twins are more similar than any randomly chosen individuals so that omitted determinants of wages and education should not be a problem in estimating the effects of education on wages using ordinary least squares. Studies using the twins approach display varying results, with some reporting slightly lower and others reporting slightly higher education return estimates as compared to conventional ordinary least squares estimates. Knight and Sabot (1981), for example used data on workers in Kenyan and Tanzanian urban enterprises to test whether human capital measured by ability test scores has an independent effect on earnings or if it simply signal inborn ability. The results showed that although ability might have a role in wage formation, controlling for it does not diminish the effect of human capital earnings. 
The data used for the purpose of this study does not provide us with information that can be used to control for ability and family background. As a consequence, drawing from Knight and Sabot’s results, we assume that though unobserved ability might have a role in wage formation, it does not significantly diminish the effect of human capital on earnings. Thus our present study does not try to correct for the presence of these problems since it does not fully benefit from the approaches to solving these problems due to data limitation. This might in fact bias the OLS estimates upwards. 
Empirical evidence 
Descriptive results : In Table 4 below, we present the average monthly wages at each level of education and for men and women in 1996. An examination of the estimates displayed in the table shows that the mean monthly earnings of salaried workers increased with the number of years spent in school. The information also shows that the mean monthly earnings were higher for men than for women as the number of years spent in school increase. For instance, the mean monthly earnings for men at the primary level was 65 153.75 FCFA for men and slightly lower for women estimated at 55 945.25 FCFA. These estimates were respectively 85 525.17 FCFA and 47 949.06 for men and women at the secondary level. 
For the pooled sample, the estimates were 63 186.80 FCFA and 77 955.67 FCFA at the primary and at the secondary levels. At the tertiary level, men earn approximately 202 615.0 FCFA and 101 000.0 FCFA for men and for women. The pooled average monthly earnings at this level were estimated at 192886.0FCFA. However, the earnings at the primary levels for women were slightly less than for secondary level. The difference in mean monthly earnings for men and women was quite remarkable at the tertiary level where women earn about half of what was earned by men. The reason for the large differential may be that men had the opportunity to get 
Table 4. Mean monthly wage by educational level and by sex, Cameroon, 1996. 
Level Men Women Total Primary education 65 153.75 47 949.06 63 186.80 Secondary education 84 525.17 55 945.27 77 955.67 Higher education 202 615.00 151 000.00 192 886.00 Total (all levels) 109 804.56 67 557.50 100 988.68 
Source: First Cameroon Household Survey (ECAM I), 1996 
Table 5. Mean earnings by experience group and by sex, Cameroon 1996. 
Experience 
(years) Men Women Total 
< 5 16 000.00 16 000.00 5 9 31 750.00 
(15 750) 
20 000.00 (20000.0) 
28 812.50 (12812.5) 10 14 77 407.30 (46 657.3) 
36 409.34 (16409.34) 
65 820.90 (37008.4) 15 24 111 440.68 (34033.38) 
61 289.69 (24880) 
104 753.80 (38932.9) 25 > 116 854.46 
(5413.78) 
65 552.80 (4263.46) 
108 051.20 (3297.4) Total 109 804.56 57 557.51 100 988.68 
Source: First Cameroon Household Survey (ECAM I), 1996. 
Table 6. Results of Standard Mincerian Equation. 
Variable Coefficient Std. 
Error 
tStatistic 
Prob. 
Constant 8.3781 0.3241 25.85 0.000 Gender -0.3474 0.0951 -3.65 0.000 School 0.1349 0.0107 12.57 0.000 Experience 0.0940 0.0166 5.67 0.000 (Experience)2 -0.0012 0.0003 -4.03 0.000 
Dependent Variable: ln (wages) Number of obs = 372; Prob > F = 0.0000; R-squared=0.3590; Adj R-squared = 0.352. 372 constitute the total number of observations with probability inferior to the observed frequency (o.oooo). R-squared represents the Pearson correlation (0.3590), with an adjusted Pearson correlation (Adj R-squared) of 0.3520 
highly paid technical jobs than women and possibly possess more professional skills necessary for recruitment into these jobs than women. 
Table 5 presents the mean monthly earnings by experience group and by sex. The information displayed in the table enables us to assess the relationship between labour market experiences and mean monthly earnings at all levels of education identified for the analysis. The information reveals that mean monthly earnings increased with labour market experience for both men and women. The results confirm the hypothesis of a diminishing mar
Yusuf and Yusuf 239 
ginal returns to increase in on-the job training. This can be seen from the figures in brackets which show changes in wages as one move from a lower group of years of labour market experience to a higher one. This implies in effect that although the mean earnings increase with the number of years of labour market experience, the increase occurs at a diminishing rate. For example, for male workers, an addition of 15750FCFA was received when they spent between 5 9 years in on-the-job market and an addition of 46657.3FCFA when their years of labour market experience lie between 10 14 years showing a more than proportionate increase. However, as the worker’s years of labour market experience increased further, additions to earnings increase but at a decreasing rate. The average earnings of the male worker increased between 15 24 and 25 years of labour market experience and above by only 5413.78FCFA compared 46657.3FCFA between 5 9 and 10 14 years of labour market experience respectively. 
The figures in brackets are changes in mean wages as one move from a lower level of years of labour market experience to a higher one. 
Estimated results : We begin by presenting the estimated results of the standard Mincerian equation presented in equation (1). As depicted in Table 6, the levels of education are not represented in these results; rather, we use the number of years of schooling to represent the return to education. These results suggest that the return to an additional year of schooling is 13.5%. This in effect shows that if a worker invested in an additional year of schooling, his earnings will increase by 13.5% on average. From the same results, the coefficient of experience is positive and that of the quadratic term of experience is negative indicating that although experience increases the level of wages, such earnings increase at a decreasing rate. Table 7 presents the coefficients of education dummies and experience variables for all salaried workers in the sample. 
The estimations show that about 35% of the total variations in log earnings are explained by the model with the coefficient of higher education explaining up to 130% of the variations in wages compared to 47% for secondary education. These results confirm those obtained by Amin and Awung (2005) that private returns to education in Cameroon are highest at the level of tertiary 
From Table 8 below, the power of the regression equation shown by the Adj. R2 are respectively 30.24, 25.34 and 31.31% for men, women and the pooled sample respectively. The statistical tests using R2 and F statistics show that the performance of the model is acceptable and the results are robust. The results suggest that the returns to an additional year of schooling were largest for higher education than for secondary education thus revealing that private profitability of higher education in Cameroon is more than that of lower levels of education. The rate of return to schooling for the pooled sample is 
240 Educ. Res. Rev. 
Table 7. Results of Modified Mincerian Equation. 
Variable Coefficient Std. Error t-Statistic Prob. Constant 9.3754 0.2988 31.38 0.000 Gender -0.2856 0.0965 -2.96 0.003 Secondary 0.4748 0.0924 5.14 0.000 Higher 1.3286 0.1117 11.89 0.000 Experience 0.0928 0.0167 5.55 0.000 (Experience)2 -0.0012 0.0003 -4.06 0.000 
Dependent Variable: ln (wages) Number of obs. = 372; Prob > F= 0.0000 R-squared = 0.3501; Adj R-squared= 0.3412. 372 constitute the total number of observations with probability inferior to observed frequency (0.0000). R-squared represents the Pearson correlation (0.3501), with an adjusted Pearson correlation (Adj R-squared) of 0.3412. 
Table 8. Estimated wages equations by sex and level of education. 
Variables Men Women Pooled sample Constant 9.0889 (29.66) 8.7537 (17.02) 9.3754 (31.38) Secondary 0.4935 (4.70) 0.3470 (1.82) 0.4748 (5.14) Higher 1.3648 (11.03) 1.0599 (3.99) 1.3286 (11.89) Experience 0.0906 (4.73) 0.1133 (3.13) 0.0928 (5.55) Experience squared -0.0010 (3.44) -0.0016 (2.43) -0.0012 (4.06) Observations 310 62 372 F. Statatistic 36.21 6.18 36.21 Adj. R2 0.3024 0.2534 0.3131 
Absolute values of t-statistics are in brackets. 
Table 9. Private rate of return to an additional year of education (%). 
Level of education Males Females Pooled sample Secondary 8.395 6.386 7.390 Higher 21.78 17.82 21.34 
Source: Authors’ calculations from the regression results. 
estimated at 7.39 and 21.34% respectively for the secondary and tertiary levels (Table 9). Although the returns to higher education are high for both men and women, there is a remarkable differential in earnings between the two groups. At the secondary level of education, the rate of return is estimated at 8.39 and 6.38% for both men and women. At the tertiary level, the returns are 21.78 and 17.82% for both men and women. Thus men in the wage sector in Cameroon seem to better compensated than women at both the secondary and the tertiary levels showing profound inequalities between the two sexes. These results contrast sharply with those obtained for Cameroon by Edokat-Tafah (1998) and the findings reported by Psacharopoulos (1994). 
As regards, private returns to investments in education 
in Cameroon, we find in general that such returns tend to be higher for the males than females. This is not surprising as the more educated are likely to hold highly paid jobs than the less educated, (though there may be individuals making much more money within the private sector with comparatively less academic qualifications). Besides, women are less competitive in the job market given that a bulk of them tends to pursue general education which is void of required relevant skills for highly paid technical jobs. 
Public profitability of higher education 
Social Returns to Higher education: Social returns are those benefits that improve the well-being of the individuals and the general public. This would include the increased tax receipts collected from educated citizens. An estimation of the social benefits of higher education will include all the costs and benefits used in the calculation of private returns and all the costs and benefits that the individual does not incur or enjoy. Thus in calculating the social value, costs would include the rental of buildings and teachers’ salaries. The earnings used should include gross of taxes and income in kind. The high level of costs involved in social returns relative to private returns may imply that social returns are lower than private returns. 
Although social returns to education are difficult to estimate because of data limitations, policy makers have used these returns to determine the profitability of investments in education. A comparison of the estimated rates of returns across educational levels provides a basis for the prioritisation of public investments in education. The social rate of returns incorporates positive externalities resulting from investment in education. Since private investments in education yield external benefits, it is possible that social returns to investments in education will tend to be higher than private returns. 
The social rate of return to education is best estimated using the elaborate method as the discount rate r which equates the stream of costs of education to the stream of benefits from education (Wossman, 2001): 
∑ s( WC th , 
+ tl , )( 1 
=+ r ) − 
t ∑ n( WW th 
, − tl , )( 1 + r ) − t lt = st 
+= 
1 
(3.4) 
where, Ch represents the cost of education incurred to attain a higher level h from a lower level l, s is the years of schooling at h educational level, n is the retirement age, Wl is forgone earnings of the student while at school, and (Wh-Wl) is the earnings differential between a person with a higher level of education. The above formula serves as a means of calculating social and private rates of return to education. However, to calculate social returns, income is considered without tax deductions, while costs include the expenses on education by the individual as well as costs incurred by the society. 
In using the above formula to measure the investment cost of education, Wossman (2001), explicitly includes the opportunity cost of wages forgone while studying. He also estimates future returns to education with reference to the difference in income stream accruing to the person with the higher qualification. Finally, he equates future streams of income to investment costs by using a discount rate which enables him to estimate the internal rate of return that will equate the costs of investments with future benefits. 
Empirical Findings: In the following analysis, we have used the elaborate method to estimate the social returns to investments in higher education in Cameroon. The results from these estimates are shown in the following Table: 
The benefits as well as the costs involved in investments in higher education have been discounted to account for inflation and the time value of money. In order to determine the public profitability of investment in higher education, we compute the internal rate of return which is the discount rate that equalises the present value of all benefits and costs. In calculating the social returns to investments in higher education, we include government subsidies as part of the costs incurred in addition to private costs. To account for benefits to the society from investment in higher education, income is considered gross of taxes. The incremental earnings arising from higher education are 62 351 520 FCFA for males and 50 188 900 FCFA for females and their respective present values are 11 101 490 and 8 935 975 FCFA. However, the net present values calculated at a discount rate of 4% real interest are greater for women than for males and are estimated at 5 780 350 and 6 677 240 FCFA respectively. The estimated internal rate of returns is 13.4 and 14.5% for males and for females respectively and are higher for women than for men. 
The overall results from the rate of returns calculation show that both private and social returns to higher education are high. The results also show that private returns are higher for men than for women at all levels. These results do not indicate that the investment in education by women is not profitable because, account is not taken of household production by females. On the contrast, the social returns to investments in higher education are higher for females than for males. Given the high levels of profitability of higher education, increases in investment in the sector as well as implementation of policies to ensure the efficiency of the system can enhance the quality of higher education as well as the creativity and productivity of those who have acquired higher education. These can go a long way to boost the development of the country. 
THE COST OF HIGHER EDUCATION IN CAMEROON 
The government of Cameroon is the highest single provider and funder of higher education in the country. Be
Yusuf and Yusuf 241 
tween 1981 and 1987, the share of government budget allocated to the Ministry of Higher Education fell below 0.5% except in 1986 when it represented 0.60 percent of overall state budget. Table 10 below shows that expenditures on higher education which initially fell from 0.60 in 1986 to 0.45 in 1987 percent as a share of total budget were relatively protected during the crisis and adjustment era. This can be shown by the dramatic increase in the allocations to higher education in absolute value and as a share of total state budget between 1988 and 1995. However, budgetary allocations to higher education and particularly to the university of Yaounde (The then lone government university before the reforms in 1993) was a serious problem. Personnel emoluments consumed about 46.3% of the total budget while 43.3% was often distributed to students as stipends. The amount allocated to cover recurrent cost was estimated at only 8.9% while a meagre 1.5% went to research and laboratory facilities (Ngwana 2003). 
Following the revival of economic growth since 1995, the overall government budget has increased unprecedentedly. This ought to have resulted in the growth of budgetary allocations to the Ministry of Higher Education but that has not been the case as the percentage of expenditure devoted to the Ministry fell to 1.26% before stagnating on an average of 0.80% between 1998 and 2001 (Table 11). The introduction of fees into state universities since 1993 has reduced the reliance on state subventions as the only source of finance as was the case in the past. Despite this, the overall budget of the universities falls short of the real needs of the system given that lecture halls are still over-crowded and the student teacher ratio is still very high. Figure 3 and Table 12 show the general budget of the government and the universities all taken together and the per student expenditure as well as the estimated contribution by the government in the form of subsidies. The table shows that expenditure per student was highest during the 1992/93 academic year and was lowest during 1997/98 academic year. 
Of the total per student expenditure in state universities, the amount provided by the state was about 92%. This share dropped to about 54% during 1997/98 academic year. The contributions of students to the financing of the universities is less significant when compared with the subventions from the central government except during the 1997/98 and 1998/99 academic year when this share rose to almost 50%. This evidence shows that although the state is still the major contributor to the financing of higher education in Cameroon, students’ participation in the financing of higher education has increased significantly in the most recent years. Generally, students who are nationals pay a flat rate of 50 000FCFA for tuition in the six state universities except in some programs and professional institutions where tuition may exceed 50 000FCFA. In private institutions tuition vary between 200 000FCFA and 700 000FCFA and the cost is borne almost entirely by the students. 
242 Educ. Res. Rev. Table 10. Social value of higher education based on mean earnings of full-time year 
round workers in Cameroon, 1996. 
Males Females Costs: Ages 18 21 Tuition, Fees, Government subsidies 2 168 000 2 168 000 Forgone earnings 4 057 200 2 685 360 Total costs discounted at 4% real interest 5 321 140 2 258 735 Benefits: Ages 22 65 Earnings with a secondary school education certificate 44 629 200 29 539 100 Earnings with a four-year higher education certificate 106 980 720 79 728 000 Differentials in earnings 62 351 520 50 188 900 Discounted at 4 percent real interest 11 101 490 8 935 975 Net Present Value of investment in higher education 5 780 350 6 677 240 Internal rate of returns (social returns) 13.4 % 14.5 % 
Source: Calculated with data from the Ministry of Higher Education, National Institute of Statistics and the second Cameroon Household Survey, ECAM 1996. 
Table 11. The Budget of the Ministry of higher Education in Billions FCFA. 
Year Total budget 
State 
Higher education budget 
Percentage share of total budget 1990 541.342 9.947 1.84 1991 613.343 10.947 1.78 1992 487.052 11.885 2.44 1993 451.284 20.257 4.49 1994 549.595 16.901 3.08 1995 638.424 16.127 2.51 1996 892.278 13.029 1.46 1997 1230.000 15.479 1.26 1998 1256.750 10.095 0.80 1999 1230.000 11.174 0.91 2000 1297.638 10.514 0.81 2001 1476.000 11.828 0.80 
Source: Department of Budget, Ministry of Economy and Finance (Finance Laws). 
Table 12. Budget of State Universities (in 103 FCFA) and Expenditure per capital. 
Year Budget Enrollment Expenditure per student 
Government subvention 
% of student contribution 1991/1992 10 201 000 39 187 260 315 210 315 19.2 1992/1993 29 477 000 43 755 673 683 623 683 7.4 1993/1994 19 180 000 38 426 499 140 449 140 10.0 1994/1995 17 800 000 40 080 444 112 394 112 11.3 1995/1996 8 075 000 38 145 211 692 61 692 23.6 1996/1997 5 765 000 38 674 149 065 99 065 33.5 1997/1998 5 349 000 49 265 108 575 58 575 46.1 1998/1999 7 032 638 60 214 116 794 66 794 42.8 1999/2000 13 163 788 59 280 222 060 172 060 22.5 2000/2001 16 829 160 63 135 266 558 216 558 18.8 2001/2002 19 127 970 71 091 269 063 219 063 18.6 2002/2003 23 761 000 74 105 320 639 270 639 15.6 
Authors’ calculations with data from the Ministry of Higher Education Statistical Yearbook. 
Yusuf and Yusuf 243 
t nemllornEd na) AFCF(e rutidnepxE800,000 700,000 
600,000 
500,000 
400,000 
300,000 
200,000 
100,000 
0 
1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 
Enrollment Per capita expenditure Year 
Figure 3. Student enrollment and expenditure per student (in CFAF) in state universities. Constructed by authors from data from the Ministry of Higher Education Statistical Yearbook. 
This evolution of the overall financing of university education in Cameroon does not show exactly how much is spent by a student in the university during a given academic year because the amount spent on tuition does not include expenses on text books, lodging, transportation, and food. Besides, the suppression of grants to students as was the case before the 1992 reforms and the introduction of high cost professional programs imply that students have to bear a larger cost of financing of university education in Cameroon. The first and the second Cameroon household surveys conducted in 1996 and 2001 respectively have shown that poverty has increased considerably which imply that a majority of students are not able to afford the cost of higher education. As a consequence, in the absence of consideration and support for poorer students, they may not be able to pay for higher education in Cameroon. With the scarcity of jobs and the inability of the university system to train students with the required skills to compete in the already saturated job market, many parents, especially the poor are less willing to allow their children pursue post secondary education. 
As concerned private institutions of higher education in the country, a greater proportion of the cost is borne by the students through tuition which is quite high compared with public institutions. It should be emphasized that promoters of these institutions with the exception of those operated by religious groups are business operators who run these institutions for profit motives. Given the financing constraints faced by many parents, enrollment into these institutions is low although the curriculum design is tailored towards the training of students to satisfy the demands of the job market. 
SOCIAL EQUITY IMPLICATIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION IN CAMEROON 
Equity implications of higher education will be concerned with the way costs and benefits of investments in the level are distributed among the different social groups in the country. In particular, we need to see if the costs and benefits are equally distributed among regions, between sexes, the different socio-economic groups and we want to see if everyone has equal access to higher education. In the presence of inequalities, we will like to know the policy options that government can undertake to reduce various inequalities. 
Beginning with the colonial heritage of the country, Cameroon is a bilingual country but with the French language dominating the English language spoken by about a third of the population. The decree creating the then University of Yaounde specified that it was a bilingual university with Anglophone and francophone students given equal opportunities to study in both languages. Unfortunately, bilingualism as a language has never been effective as lectures are given almost entirely in French with the exception of the English Department making studies to be extremely difficult for English speaking students. 
Apart from the emerging problems of overcrowding that plagued the University of Yaounde towards the 1980s, policy-makers found it difficult to clearly define the status of languages in the bilingual system with limited access to English-speaking students. Besides, as a lone university located at the national capital, students from other provinces had to cover several kilometres to acquire university education thus incurring higher costs. 
244 Educ. Res. Rev. Table 13. Distribution of students by university and by gender, 2000/2001. 
University Males Females Female % of total Total Buea 3106 3006 49.18 6112 Douala 6853 3933 36.46 10786 Dschang 8242 3049 27.00 11291 Ngaoundere 3493 1202 25.60 4695 Yaounde I 12498 7669 38.03 20167 Yaounde II 5931 4153 41.18 10084 Total State Universities 40128 23007 36.44 63135 Catholic Univ. of Central Africa 1237 786 38.85 2023 Total 40559 23288 36.15 64426 
Source: Ministry of Higher Education and National Institute of Statistics (NIS). 
Until 1993, all students, irrespective of socio-economic background were entitled to stipends and paid no tuition. As a result, it was possible for any student that had the requirement for admission into the university to enrol in the university and other tertiary structures. Besides, admission into the university or any other type of specialised institution of higher education was a guarantee for a well paid job with the government or the private market. This policy enhanced equality of access particularly with regards to costs and benefits on public spending. 
However, by 1990, it was realised that the functioning of the system was grossly impaired and was no longer responding to the exigencies of the labour market. Given this situation and other challenges, a policy was put in place to revitalise the system and restore quality and accountability. Consequently, decree No. 92/74 of 13th April 1992 and decree No. 93/034 of 19th January, 1993 instituted major reforms aimed at broadening the participation of various stakeholders in the financing and management of higher education through the introduction of tuition and eventual reduction in government funding. In order to decongest the lone university and expand access to all, five more state universities were created which have greatly reduced congestion to a limited extent. (It should be noted that the 1993 HE reforms besides aiming at increasing access, also focused on strengthening quality and relevance through professionalisation of programmes, and responding to equity concerns. The creation of the other universities was partly aimed at doing this). 
The introduction of fees implied that students will have to incur extra costs to acquire university education which has tended to restrict access to children from low income families. In reality, the average costs of pursuing university education in Cameroon is not less than a million FCFA per annum be it in public or private higher education. In some highly technical professional programmes such as management and engineering, tuition alone that is demanded from the student exceeds a million FCFA. This clearly indicates that only children from more affluent families can meet up with the costs. This perhaps, explain(s) why most dropouts from higher education are mostly from low income families. 
Gender equity as a policy option has never been a problem in Cameroon because both female and male are given equal opportunities in access to all levels of education. However, cultural and perhaps religious constraints tend to hinder the education attainment of the girl child so that enrollment into institutions of higher education becomes gender biased (Table 13). Of the total number of registered students during the 2001/2002 academic year, 27,824 or 37% of total were females while the male population was 47,647 or 63% respectively. This enrollment included that of the Catholic University of Central Africa as the only private university. The number of students enrolled in private institutions of higher education legally recognized by the Ministry of Higher Education was estimated at 6 616 students during the 2001/2002 school year. This is an indication that despite the proliferation of these institutions operated by the private sector, they are yet to attract those seeking to pursue university education. With the exception of the University of Buea where the disparity in enrolment of students of both sexes is low, gender differences are higher in other universities especially in the University of Ngaoundere where the community is predominantly Moslem with great negative perception of female education. 
Inequity also exists in access to decent jobs. From Table 2, it can be seen that women have the lowest education attainment. About 40% of the women do not have access to formal education or are unable to go through the first year in school. This combines with structural obstacles to explain the difficulty faced by women in getting decent jobs. Women generally are less competent compared to their male counterparts due to low education attainment and low levels of professional experience which obstruct them from getting formal jobs. 
From the issues discussed, it is obvious that the challenges to public policy in guaranteeing equity in access to higher education are enormous. These issues need to be addressed if higher education were to serve as an engine of economic development in Cameroon. A key suggestion in Government financing of the system of higher education seems to be justified for equity reasons. This need 
not compromise the objective of efficiency in the management of government resources. The government should always try to achieve a balance between the two objectives. 
Conclusion and policy suggestions 
The study has found that investment in education especially at the tertiary level is profitable. In particular, it finds that the higher the level of education of the worker, the higher the level of returns obtained from such investment. As a consequence, it is recommended that the government should be cautious when instituting the recovery of costs at the tertiary level of education as this tends to influence the demand for places in institutions of higher learning. 
However, since the government faces financial constraints in paying for the cost of training and the provision of other public services, it is advisable for the state to encourage universities and institutions of higher education to adopt ways of generating revenue to supplement the state financing of the higher education sector. This does not imply that individuals should not contribute to financing through cost recovery but that this should not act as a disincentive for private investment in higher education. Given the high level of externalities associated with higher education, the role of the state in promoting investment in the sector should equally be enhanced. 
The fact that higher education yields higher returns than the secondary and primary levels does not imply that these levels should be given less priority for the simple reason that the lower levels are inputs into the higher level. Although the role of higher education in economic development has been at the centre of controversies in recent studies, there is no doubt that this level of education plays an important role on the economic development of Cameroon. Higher education has a positive impact on the earnings of individuals and consequently on their productivity which is crucial for the overall productivity of output growth. However, caution needs to be taken when concluding that higher education can contribute to output growth since this depends on whether jobs are available to enable graduates use the skills acquired through human capital investments. The analysis of the private profitability of higher education in Cameroon provides a means of assessing the economic productivity of a trained worker. This is also one of the ways to determine the contribution of higher education to the development of the country. The study has given a comprehensive assessment of the returns to higher education in Cameroon which are essential in motivating investment in the sector by both the private individual and the government. However, because Cameroon like other countries of the developing world faces the problem of declining resources and financial constraints, resources devoted to the sector of higher education should be tailored to produce the best outcomes in terms of relevance and quality in relation to programs and professionalism. 
Yusuf and Yusuf 245 
As a matter of fact, the programs of most universities in Cameroon are seriously, out of step with the real world in getting students ready to become workers in the post university world. Vocational schools are what are in vogue compared to those expensive time consuming university diplomas. Most graduates in Cameroon can hardly find jobs and without jobs there is no productivity and minus productivity there is no economic growth. What is in demand today is not graduates but people with the required skills to work in trades and services office skills, auto repairs, computer repairs, plumbing, hairdressing and many other trades. These are not necessarily desirable jobs, but they offer the means and flexibility needed by those whose true vocation is service. That is what the world is today and no reason why people are turning to private institutions which offer such opportunities. 
Two trends that characterise major changes in higher education should be taken into consideration. These are privatisation and the emergence of the private sector in higher education; privatisation refers to the involvement of private sector or the market in the operation and management of the institutions of higher education while ownership rests more or less within the public domain. The private sector on the other hand, indicates growth of the non state sector in higher education which is becoming popular in Cameroon. In most cases, this sector does not receive funding from the government and in any case does not rely on state funds for its growth and expansion. The state in Cameroon is taking an interest in the activeties of this sector with regulatory texts provided for its existence and operation. 
Prudent management of the scarce resources and efficiency in the allocation and use of government financing can produce better outcomes. The problem of management has plagued higher education in Cameroon. Decentralisation and the use of trained administrators based on merits will certainly bring credibility to higher education in the use of scarce resources. 
Another reason for the call for continuous government financing is the promotion of equity. Higher education used to be regarded as an engine of opportunity but today, quality higher education is fast becoming the domain of the rich and influential who alone can afford the huge costs required for training in the private sector. Actually, the shift to private financing of the cost of higher education can compromise the education attainment of individuals from low income households. However, the effect will be less significant if institutions of higher education can generate incomes from activities such as research to cover part of the costs and if the revenue saved is used to provide selective subsidies to the poor especially at the primary level of education. 
REFERENCES 
Amin AA, Awung WJ (2005). Economic Analysis of Private Returns to Investment in Education in Cameroon. Regional Conference on education in West Africa: Constraints and Opportunities. Dakar, Senegal. 
246 Educ. Res. Rev. 
Appleton S, Bigsten A, Manda DK (1999) Educational Expansion and Economic Decline: Returns to Education in Kenya, 1978-1995. Oxford, Center for the Study of African Economics. Working Paper No. 99-6. Ashenfelter O, Krueger HB (1994), Estimates of the Economic Returns to Schooling for a New Sample of Twins. Am. Econ. Rev. 84: 115773. Barro R, Xavier S-I-M (1995), Economic Growth, New York: McGraw
Hill. Becker GS (1964), Human Capital, 2nd edition, New York, NY: National 
Bureau of Economic Research, 1975. BIT (Bureau international du Travail) (2004). Les statistiques sur 
l’emploi et le marché du travail au Cameroon ,Yaounde. Blackburn M, Neumark D (1995), Are OLS Estimates of the Return to schooling Biased Downward? Another Look. Rev. Econ. Stat. 77: 217-29. Burnett N, Patrinos HA (1997). ‘Education and the Changing World Economy: The Imperative of Reforms; Prospects Quarterly Review of Comparative Education, International Bureau of Education, Paris: UNESCO. 17: 2 Card D (1993) Using Geographic Variation in College Proximity to estimate the Return to Schooling. Princeton University, Industrial Relations Section, Working Paper No. 317. Denison EF (1985). Trends in American Economic Growth, 1929-1982. 
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution. Easterly W (2001). The Elusive Quest for Growth: Economists’ Adventures and Misadventures in the Tropics (Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press). Edokat-Tafah EO (1998) “Rates of Return to Education: A Case of Cameroon” Unpublished paper, Department of economics, University of Yaounde II, Soa. Gaston N, Tenjo J (1992), Educational Attainment and earnings Deter
mination in Colombia. Econ. Dev. Cult. Change. 41: 125-39. Griliches Z (1977), Estimating the Returns to Schooling: Some Econo
metric Problems. Econmetrica 45: 1-22. Jorgenson DW, Griliches Z (1967), “The Explanation of Productivity 
Change.” Rev. Econ. Stud. 34(3): 249-283. Knight JB, Sabot RH (1981), The Returns to education: Increasing with Experience or Decreasing with Expansion? Oxford Bull Econ. Stat. 43: 51-71. Lin T-C (2004), The Role of Higher Education in Economic Development: on Empirical Study of Taiwan Case. J. Asian Econ. 15: 355371. Lin T-C (2003). Education, Technical Progress, and Economic Growth: 
The Case of Taiwan. Econ. Educ. Rev. 22 (2): 213-220. Mincer J (1974): Schooling, Experience and Earnings. National Bureau 
of Economic Research, New York: Columbia University Press. Murphy KM, Shleifer A, Vishny R (1991). ‘The Allocation of Talent: 
Implications for Growth’, Quarterly J. Econ. 106(2) 503-530. Mwabu G, Schultz T (2000), Wage Premiums for Education and Location of South African Workers, by Gender and Race. Econ. Dev. Cult. Change. 48: 307-334. Njeuma LD, Endeley H, Mbuntum FF, Lyonga N, Nkweteyim L, Musenja S, Ekange E (1999) Reforming a National System of Higher Education: The Case of Cameroon. A Report of the ADEA Working Group on Higher Education. Pritchett L (1996) “Where has All the Education Gone?” World Bank Re
search Paper, Washington D.C. 
Psacharopoulos G (1985). “Returns to Education: A Further Update and 
Implications” J. Hum. Resour. 20 (4): 583-605. Psacharopoulos G (1994). “Returns to Investment in Education” World 
Development, 22 (9): 1325-43. Psacharopoulos G, Patrinos H (2002). Returns to Investment in Education: A Further Update. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, No. 2881. Washington D.C. Rosenzweig MR (1995). ‘Why are there Returns to Schooling?’ Am. 
Econ. Rev. 85(2): 153-58. Saxton J (2000). ‘Investment in Education: Private and Public Returns. JEC study, Congress of the United States < http://www.ho-use.gov/je c>. Schultz T (1981). “Investment in Human Capital” Am. Econ. Rev. 51(1): 
1-17. Schultz T (1981). Investing in People: The Economics of Population 
Quality, University of California Press, Berkeley. TFHES (Task Force on Higher Education and Society) (2000). Higher Education in Developing Countries: Peril and Promise. World Bank, Washington D.C. Tilak JB (1986). ‘Education and its Relation to Economic Growth: World 
Bank Discussion Paper 46, Washington D.C. Tilak JB (1989). Education and its Relation to Economic Growth, Poverty and Income Distribution: Past Evidence and Further Analysis. Discussion Paper No. 46. World Bank, Washington D.C. Tilak JB (2003). Higher Education and Development. National Institute 
of Educational Planning and Administration. New Delhi, India. World Bank (1994a). Higher Education: The Lessons of Experience. 
Washington D.C. World Bank (1994b). Priorities and Strategies for Education: A World Bank Sector Review, Education and Social Policy Department, World Bank. World Bank (2000). Can Africa Claim the 21st Century? Washington 
D.C. 
View View publication publication stats stats
﻿See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/254195471 
Higher Education, Innovation and Economic Development 
Article 
CITATIONS 29 
READS 369 
1 author: 
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects: 
Bengt-Åke Lundvall 
145 PUBLICATIONS 19,904 CITATIONS 
SEE PROFILE 
The Learning Economy and the Economics of Hope View project 
MEADOW View project 
All content following this page was uploaded by Bengt-Åke Lundvall on 07 October 2014. 
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. 
45490 
2008 
A B C D E 
Annual World Bank Conference on 
Development Economics 
Regional 
Higher Education and 
Development 
Edited by Justin Yifu Lin and Boris Pleskovic 
Higher Education and 
Development 
Annual World Bank Conference 
on Development Economics—Regional 
2008 
Higher Education and Development 
Washington, D.C. 
Edited by Justin Yifu Lin and Boris Pleskovic 
 2008 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank 1818 H Street, N.W. Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A. Internet: www.worldbank.org E-mail: feedback@worldbank.org 
All rights reserved 
1 2 3 4 5 10 09 08 
This volume is the product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this volume do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. 
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank of the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries. 
Rights and Permissions The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission promptly to reproduce portions of the work. 
For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, Tel: 978-750-8400, Fax: 978-750-4470, www.copyright.com. 
All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, Fax: 202-522-2422, email: pubrights@worldbank.org. 
ISBN: 978-0-8213-7123-7 eISBN: 978-0-8213-7124-4 DOI: 10.1596/978-0-8213-7123-7 ISSN: 1020-4407 
ABOUT THIS BOOK vii 
INTRODUCTION 1 Justin Yifu Lin and Boris Pleskovic 
OPENING ADDRESS 9 Wu Qidi 
OPENING ADDRESS 13 François Bourguignon 
KEYNOTE ADDRESS Skilled Labor and the International Economy: Whence It Comes, Whither It Goes 15 L. Alan Winters 
KEYNOTE ADDRESS Global Returns to Higher Education: Trends, Drivers, and Policy Responses 25 François Bourguignon and F. Halsey Rogers 
KEYNOTE ADDRESS Higher Education Financing in East Asia: Policy Implications for China 41 Weifang Min 
Higher Education and Migration: Brain Drain and Sharing Skills in the Region 
Higher Education and International Migration in Asia: Brain Circulation 59 Mark R. Rosenzweig 
COMMENTS Frédéric Docquier 85 Patricia Sto Tomas 93v 
Contents 
vi | CONTENTS 
Private-Public Provision of Higher Education 
Intersectoral Interfaces in Higher Education Development: Private and Public in Sync? 101 Daniel C. Levy 
COMMENTS Kai-ming Cheng 125 Norman LaRocque 133 
Financing Higher Education 
Financing Higher Education: Lessons from Developed Economies, Options for Developing Economies 143 Nicholas Barr 
Technological Innovation: Linkages between Universities and Industry 
Wellsprings of Modern Economic Growth: Higher Education, Innovation, and Local Economic Development 177 Maryann P. Feldman and Ian I. Stewart 
Higher Education, Innovation, and Economic Development 201 Bengt-Åke Lundvall 
COMMENTS Fumio Kodama 229 Shahid Yusuf 237 
Higher Education and Labor Markets in Asia 
Higher Education and the Labor Market in India 245 Pawan Agarwal 
COMMENTS Satryo Soemantri Brodjonegoro 273 Sharifah Hapsah Shahabudin 279 
The Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics is a forum for discussion and debate of important policy issues facing developing countries. The conferences emphasize the contribution that empirical economic research can make to understanding development processes and to formulating sound development policies. Conference papers are written by researchers and academics in and outside the World Bank. The conference series was started in 1989. Conference papers are reviewed by the editors and are also subject to internal and external peer review. Some papers were revised after the conference, to reflect comments made by discussants or from the floor, while most discussants’ comments were not revised. As a result, discussants’ comments may refer to elements of the paper that no longer exist in their original form. Participants’ affiliations identified in this volume are as of the time of the conference, January 16–17, 2007. 
Justin Yifu Lin and Boris Pleskovic edited this volume. As in previous years, the planning and organization of the 2007 conference was a joint effort. Special thanks are due to Alan Gelb for overall guidance. We thank several anonymous reviewers for their comments and Aehyung Kim for her useful suggestions and advice. We also thank the conference coordinator, Leita Jones, whose excellent organizational skills helped ensure a successful conference. Finally for pulling this volume together we thank the editorial staff, especially Stuart Tucker and Mark Ingebretsen from the Office of the Publisher. Book production and dissemination were coordinated by the World Bank Office of the Publisher. 
vii 
About This Book 
The Annual Bank Conference on Development Economics (ABCDE) is one of the best-known conferences for the presentation and discussion of new knowledge on de velopment. It is an opportunity for many of the world’s finest development thinkers to present their ideas. The papers in this volume were presented at the ABCDE that was held on January 16–17, 2007, in Beijing, China. Each year the topics selected for the conference represent either new areas of concern for future research or areas that we believe will benefit from a reexamination. 
The topic of the 2007 conference was “Higher Education and Development,” which encompassed five themes: higher education and migration, private-public provision of higher education, financing of higher education, technological innovation (linkages between universities and industry), and higher education and labor markets in Asia. 
Welcome Addresses 
In her welcome address, Wu Qidi notes that the exchange of ideas at this ABCDE conference are important for promoting the development of higher education in East Asia, especially in China. She then introduces seven aspects of recent progress in China’s higher education. First, China has established the world’s largest higher education system by rapidly increasing the enrollment rate during the last decade. Second, the quality of higher education has been improving steadily due to reforms that have modified teaching methods. Third, educational infrastructure, including libraries and teachers’ quality, has been consistently improved. Fourth, a breakthrough has been made in reform of the higher education system, including theJustin Yifu Lin is chief economist and senior vice president of the World Bank. Boris Pleskovic is research manager, Development Economics, World Bank. 
Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics 2008, Regional  2008 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank 
1 
Introduction 
JUSTIN YIFU LIN AND BORIS PLESKOVIC 
2 | JUSTIN YIFU LIN AND BORIS PLESKOVIC 
reform of administrative mechanisms giving provincial governments a major role in managing their higher education institutions and in assisting low-income students with financial aid. Fifth, remarkable progress has been made by supporting projects to build world-class universities and research centers. Sixth, the research capacity in science and technology, as well as in humanities and social sciences, has been strengthened. Finally, the international status of higher education has been promoted by establishing educational cooperation and exchange with 178 countries, regions, and international organizations. Qidi concludes that, although the progress has been remarkable, China still confronts many challenges, including the need to devote more resources for higher education. 
François Bourguignon states that Regional Bank Conference on Development Economics (RBCDE) is an important event, which has evolved over the years into a major forum for international researchers to focus on development issues in particular regions of the world. He notes that the focus of this conference—higher education and development—is a topic of great importance for the East Asia region and for middle-income countries in general. Bourguignon observes that, at relatively low levels of national development, the focus of educational policy is mostly on primary education, an emphasis embedded in the Millennium Development Goals. He argues that, as development proceeds, economic growth creates demand for workers with higher education, thus shifting the emphasis from primary to both the secondary and tertiary levels, a process that has been reflected in recent educational developments in China. In this regard, he observes that historically the World Bank made its first loan to China a quarter century ago, and it was intended for higher education. Many other World Bank loans for higher education have followed. 
Bourguignon notes that, while primary education can be justified easily in terms of the benefits of and costs to society, the issues are much more complex for higher levels of education. Specifically, he lists several issues that require special consideration, such as who should pay for education, how it should be provided (public or private), and how the challenge of the brain drain of highly skilled professionals should be managed. 
Keynote Addresses 
In his keynote address, François Bourguignon discusses three questions. First, he asks whether developing countries are realizing higher returns to higher education, as observed the United States in the 1970s and 1980s. Second, he asks what is causing the trend in returns and whether this is a structural or a transitory phenomenon. Finally, he discusses policy issues that need to be addressed in responding to these trends. 
In the United States, the college premium has continued to rise since the late 1970s and 1980s, and several other high-income countries have shown a similar pattern. However, this is a broad trend that is not universal among Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries. On the basis of limited data, Bourguignon concludes that the evidence currently available suggests that, in 
INTRODUCTION | 3 
many countries, the relative return to higher education tended to increase in the 1980s and 1990s. Moreover, the trend appears to be even more consistent in the middle-income countries than in the OECD. He then discusses issues related to the demand for and supply of skills, noting that the literature has tended to show a global trend toward rising demand for skills. But for individual countries, trends in returns to skills depend on a complex, country-specific interaction of supply and demand. 
Bourguignon also discusses several issues for governments to consider regarding how best to address rising returns to tertiary education. He identifies three steps: (1) investing public resources for tertiary education efficiently; (2) expanding the pipeline of qualified entrants to tertiary education; and (3) assuring quality of both publicly and privately provided tertiary education. He argues that together this constitutes an agenda for ensuring that the tertiary sector can respond flexibly and efficiently to higher demand for skills. In conclusion, Bourguignon argues that, if the broad trend toward increasing earning differentials between highly educated people and other workers is allowed to continue, income and social inequalities will deepen. He states that it is important to take steps to avoid creating these fundamental inequalities in countries that enjoy rapid growth. He recommends that this can be achieved by the right combination of policies to expand access to tertiary education efficiently and on the basis of merit. 
Weifang Min presents the success story of several East Asian countries in achieving dynamic economic growth in the last 40 years. Min argues that many factors can explain the success. Among them are the priority given to industries with comparative advantages, export-oriented policies, policies supporting a free or managed market, relatively high saving and investment rates, and attitudes and work ethics supportive of development. Perhaps even more important, the values and cultural traditions of many East Asian economies attach a high priority to education, which has helped East Asia to produce relatively well-developed human resources and to absorb and apply new scientific and technological inventions relatively easily. These long-standing values and beliefs result in ever-increasing demands for education and have had a significant effect on development. According to the International Monetary Fund, “One lesson from the past is that the economies—such as Japan and South Korea—which committed themselves to education and training made great strides in both human development and economic development.” Thus it is a shared belief among East Asian economies that higher education is the key to advancing economic development. However, financing higher education poses a critical challenge. In addressing the financing issue, Min presents analyses of financing patterns for higher education in East Asia and discusses what a country like China may learn from the experience of other East Asian economies. 
Alan Winters presents a subject that lies close to the heart of the Global Development Network and the World Bank’s Development Economics Vice Presidency: the training and employment of highly skilled labor. Winters argues that the largest single contrast between developed and developing countries lies in the availability and use of highly skilled labor, although it is not the only cause of the differences in their economic, social, and political achievements. However, it seems safe to assert that it is a 
4 | JUSTIN YIFU LIN AND BORIS PLESKOVIC 
major contributor and that successful development will require markets for highly skilled labor that operate with a reasonable degree of social efficiency. He specifies social efficiency because there are good reasons to believe that skilled labor creates strong positive externalities, economically (for example, creating opportunities for others to be more productive), socially (delivering services where value exceeds cost or price), and even politically (strengthening institutions by enhancing accountability). 
Winters makes four propositions: universities are central to the training of highly skilled labor; the so-called brain circulation is an important topic for research because, whether positive or negative, its effects seem likely to be significant; building capacity to undertake policy research in developing countries is both difficult and important for enhancing development; and because labor is scarce, we should not waste it. The author concludes that highly skilled labor is one of the magic ingredients of development, yet there is much we do not know. The research agenda about how to produce highly skilled labor and allocate it across sectors is challenging. 
Higher Education and Migration: Brain Drain and Sharing Skills in the Region 
Mark R. Rosenzweig considers a neglected component of the international mobility of skilled individuals: domestic schooling policies and the supply of schooling to the foreign-born in high-income countries. He shows that much of the mobility of international students can be explained by the same factors that cause international migration: the search of workers for better-paying jobs. 
Based on new estimates of the global prices of skills, Rosenzweig finds that students out-migrate at greater rates from low-income countries and to host countries with the highest skill prices. However, student outflows also respond directly to domestic investments in higher education. The results indicate that upgrading the quality of higher education reduces student outflows to other countries, but that increasing the number of colleges increases the outflow of students for foreign (postgraduate) training. This phenomenon results from the fact that increasing the number of college graduates increases the population of workers who benefit more from migrating to high skill-price countries. 
The most important feature of student mobility is that a large fraction of students schooled abroad return to their home country. This is especially true for students from Asian countries. Rosenzweig finds that return rates of foreign-trained students are lower for low-wage countries. However, such countries have larger domestic populations of foreign-trained graduates, because they export larger numbers of students than high-wage sending countries. Rosenzweig points out that the subsidization of foreign students is disproportionate in high-income countries compared with low-wage countries. 
Even though low-income countries appear to be net beneficiaries, he identifies two issues of concern. First, because most foreign students are likely to come from higherincome elites, it is not clear that the best and the brightest from the sending countries 
INTRODUCTION | 5 
are being educated abroad. Second, because of incomplete data, it is not clear how many students return, and therefore, we lack sufficient evidence to characterize accurately the net brain drain from low-income countries. In conclusion, Rosenzweig states that higher education policies in countries with low skill prices cannot be appropriately formulated without paying attention to the causes of and returns to the out-migration of students seeking higher education and higher-paying jobs. 
Private-Public Provision of Higher Education 
Daniel C. Levy highlights the contribution of public and private higher education to national development. Higher education rarely remains a single-sector phenomenon, yet most analyses ignore or deal only perfunctorily with private sector provision. Levy departs from that pattern by identifying the principal characteristics of the fastgrowing private sector. We need to know how the two sectors contrast and interact. Levy points out that, for the most part, private and public sectors of higher education are significantly distinct from each other, playing largely contrasting roles for higher education and national development. Rapid for-profit growth is a current and dramatic example of such private-public distinctiveness. Patterns of interaction are quite varied, from conflict and competition to complementarity, emulation, and cooperation, both across and within regions as well as over time. Levy notes that strong empirical reality shows that there is more weight in private-public differences than in private-public similarities. The differences are fundamental in several key aspects of finance, governance, and functions. Levy concludes that the growth of private higher education has shaken up higher education, with the interrelationships between the private and public as well as between each and national development in a state of rapid flux. 
Financing Higher Education 
Nicholas Barr argues that education faces a collision between fiscal constraints and a need for more resources for investment in all levels of education. Technological change requires more varied and more frequent education and training, and demographic change points to a need for more investment in physical and human capital. However, international competition exerts downward pressure on fiscal capacity, and fiscal pressures are compounded by competing demands connected with aging populations and medical advances. In the face of these pressures, policy makers face a tradeoff between the size of the higher education system, its quality, its capacity to widen access, and its fiscal cost. Student loans can ease the tradeoff by supplementing public funding with private finance. But loans have institutional capacity requirements that frequently receive insufficient weight. 
Barr explores policy design, drawing on economic theory and international experience, and also discusses the institutional prerequisites for a loan system to be 
6 | JUSTIN YIFU LIN AND BORIS PLESKOVIC 
implemented effectively. In addition to considering how to locate resources, he discusses how to use resources most effectively; that is, mechanisms through which to allocate them to educational institutions (for example, competitive regime) and to students (loans or grants, needs-based or merit-based transfers). Finally, he explores the instruments that policy makers can use to expand educational opportunities, arguing that the issue is much wider than education finance. Financial measures include savings schemes, government subsidies (for example, “free” tuition), and cost sharing through current charges and student loans. Information measures seek to inform schoolchildren and raise their aspirations. Educational measures include improved early education. Thus an important message is that policy makers should consider higher education policies not in isolation, but from a life-cycle perspective that includes early education—a message very much in accord with those of the 2007 World Development Report. 
Technological Innovation: Linkages between Universities and Industry 
Maryann P. Feldman and Ian I. Stewart examine the relationships among institutions of higher education, innovation, and local economic development. Knowledge is arguably the most important commodity of the modern economy, and universities and other higher education institutions are the primary creators of this currency. One of the new responsibilities of institutions of higher education is to create effective knowledge transfer mechanisms, whether the purpose is to promote social or economic development, to enhance economic competitiveness, or simply to increase the stock of knowledge. The fact that much of the benefit of higher education is captured in a local area is part of the story related to the emergence and genesis of technologybased clusters. Many developing and developed economies attempt to emulate the U.S. experience and to replicate the success of Silicon Valley. The emphasis is typically on leveraging university resources to increase economic growth. The literature concludes, however, that universities are necessary, but not sufficient, for technologybased economic development to occur and that universities typically lag rather than lead economic development by becoming responsive once an entrepreneurial spark has been ignited. 
Feldman and Stewart then address the role of institutions of higher education in innovation systems and consider how best to create and enable human capital with the ultimate goal of reaping rewards in terms of wealth creation and higher standards of living. While considerable attention has been paid to the role of research universities, it is more appropriate to consider the entire sector of higher education, which includes the complementary and reinforcing institutions such as liberal arts colleges, institutes of technology, professional schools, community colleges, and continuing education programs. Taken together, these academic institutions provide the basis for the range of skills required for advanced economies and form the fabric of competitive regions. Feldman and Stewart emphasize the different roles and types of higher 
INTRODUCTION | 7 
education institutions as well as the contribution of each to the innovation system. They conclude by providing a framework for considering the evolving role of institutions of higher education. In addition, they argue that the policy implications of how best to organize higher education in order to create knowledge transfer to sustain innovation and economic growth is an important question for both advanced and developing economies. 
Bengt-Åke Lundvall links higher education to economic development and draws policy implications through an analysis of how graduates contribute to innovation and learning. Lundvall refers to recent empirical research and demonstrates that graduates act both as innovators and as equilibrators in the learning economy. The policy discussion focuses on two questions. First, how can higher education be designed so as to break the vicious circle of stagnating supply of and demand for graduates? Second, how can a general strategy be designed to vitalize national innovation systems that include investment in higher education as an important element? He encourages less developed countries to build universities more strongly rooted in the regional context, a model based on the U.S. land grant colleges, including extension services. 
Lundvall also recommends a deep reform of teaching methods by emphasizing problem-based learning, where problems are taken from the domestic reality, as well as integration of local practical experience in study programs. Without reform and with the focus on building universities as national centers of excellence, the major outcome of investments may be further brain drain toward the rich countries. He concludes by arguing that reforms of higher education cannot break vicious cycles on their own. Ambitious national strategies are needed to vitalize the innovation system. Reforming higher education should be seen as a key element of such a strategy. 
Higher Education and the Labor Markets in Asia 
Pawan Agarwal argues that skill-biased technical changes have created demand for a more qualified workforce. This has put pressure on higher education institutions to expand. Over the last few years, India has witnessed a healthy, but nontraditional, model of growth, with growth in services preceding growth in manufacturing. This growth has been driven primarily by the growth of information technology (IT) and IT-enabled services and skill-intensive manufacturing. The large pool of qualified manpower has helped to fuel this growth, initiating a perpetual cycle requiring even larger numbers of qualified people to sustain it. 
With the bulk of the publicly funded higher education system not equipping students with skills required in the labor market, the burden of providing people with requisite skills is on the private institutions. Private institutions emerged amid government ambivalence and produce graduates of uneven quality. The private institutions operate in a dysfunctional regulatory environment that neither maintains quality nor allows them to experiment and innovate. 
8 | JUSTIN YIFU LIN AND BORIS PLESKOVIC 
Agarwal undertakes a sector-by-sector analysis of the education and skills of the existing and projected workforce and matches them with existing and projected demand, concluding that the absolute number of qualified people is adequate, but the mismatch and poor quality of skills are serious concerns. Reorienting the public system of higher education, reforming the regulatory environment for the private sector, and building pathways between the formal and informal systems seem to be the way to make the connection between higher education and job creation. Taking the lessons from experience of other countries and adapting them to the Indian situation, Agarwal suggests various specific institutional mechanisms for better and continued alignment of the higher education and training systems with the labor market in India. 
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you to the Regional Bank Conference on Development Economics. On behalf of the minister of education, I would like to extend my sincere congratulations for the successful opening of this conference. 
With the theme of higher education and development, this conference has gathered together a number of prominent economists, researchers, policy makers, education experts, and students to discuss and share their views on topics such as higher education and the exchange of skills and talent, higher education and development, technological innovations, integration of the university and industry, and higher education and the labor market. These discussions and exchanges are important both now and in the future because they will help to promote the development of higher education in East Asia, especially in China. 
I would like to take this opportunity to share with you some information on the development of higher education in China. Given the country’s sustained and rapid economic development since the end of 1990s, China has made remarkable progress in expanding and improving its system of higher education. 
First, as a developing country with a large population, China manages the largest system of higher education in the world. From 1998 to 2005, the number of higher education institutions grew from 1,080 to 5,048, an increase of 4.7 times, and the total number of students enrolled in higher education grew from 8 million to 23 million, an increase of 2.9 times. The growth rate of enrollment in higher education also accelerated from 9.8 to 21 percent. China has entered a period of mass higher education, and these developments have laid a solid foundation for enhancing the quality of China’s human resources, for promoting rapid, sustainable, and healthy economic and social development, as well as for supporting reform and development within higher education itself. 
Wu Qidi is vice minister of education, Beijing, China. 
Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics 2008, Regional  2008 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank 
9 
Opening Address 
WU QIDI 
10 | WU QIDI 
Second, the quality of higher education has improved steadily. The Chinese government considers quality to be the central goal of higher education and is making every effort to balance quality, scale, and outcome. We have initiated and implemented various projects to improve the quality of higher education by reforming and modifying the institutions themselves, the structure of disciplines, and teaching methods. We have also been giving awards for excellence in teaching, developing an outstanding national curriculum, promoting reform of how universities teach English, and assessing undergraduate teaching and the learning process. All of these efforts have energized both teachers and students. 
Third, the conditions in China’s colleges and universities have improved greatly. By 2005, some 2,273 higher education institutions had been established in China, employing more than 1 million teachers. The quality of teaching has been improving. Funds for teaching materials have grown at an annual average rate of 28.7 percent, and the number of library books has increased 15.1 percent annually. As conditions have improved, higher education institutions have been able to operate more efficiently. 
Fourth, breakthroughs have been made in the reform of higher education. Remarkable progress has been achieved in the reform of administrative and financial management. Under the new administrative arrangements, higher education institutions will be managed by a two-tiered system involving both the central and provincial governments, with provincial governments assuming the major role. A number of comprehensive universities have been founded, and this has improved efficiency overall. Great achievements have also been made in personnel and logistics. The policies governing financial assistance and the mechanisms for making financial help available have been improved. Our policy is to offer strong support for students in financial difficulties. 
Fifth, remarkable progress has been made in building world-class universities and key disciplines. Implementation of the so-called 985 and 211 projects through the ninth and tenth five-year plans has supported this effort by constructing universities and expanding their offerings. Today, we are meeting in Beijing University, one of the world-class universities created since 1998. These projects not only have built numerous universities but also have cultivated and retained teachers and researchers with higher-level skills. Our goal remains to conduct world-class research in Chinese universities. Much work remains, and we need to exert more effort in that direction. 
Sixth, the capacity of higher education to serve the needs of society has been strengthened. Our institutions are building their capacity to conduct research in science and technology, to function as think tanks in the humanities and social sciences, and to develop advanced culture and build a well-off, well-rounded society. We are building universities capable of speaking to both sides: science and technology and the humanities and social sciences. 
Seventh, the international status of China’s system of higher education has been enhanced by stronger cooperation between China and other countries. China has established educational cooperation and exchange with 178 countries, regions, and international organizations. In addition, China has signed mutual degree accreditation 
OPENING ADDRESS | 11 
agreements with 32 countries and various regions, including 26 developed countries such as Austria, France, Germany, and the United Kingdom. 
Although remarkable progress has been made, China confronts many difficulties, including insufficient financing, large demand for jobs, growing demand for innovation in science and technology, and shortage of skilled workers. 
The Chinese government has paid a great deal of attention to these problems and is making every effort to address them. New projects are being designed to improve higher education even further, and we welcome the suggestions and discussion of experts from other countries. 
If higher education institutions in the world were regarded as a big international family, then universities and colleges of each country and region would be family members living in mutual connection and cooperation. I hope that this conference will deepen our cooperation and exchanges, making them more extensive and fruitful. On behalf of the minister of education, I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to the World Bank for its continuous support of China’s educational development. Long-term cooperative relationships have been established between the Ministry of Education of China and the World Bank. We look forward to expanding our mutual understanding and strengthening our cooperation in the future, making greater contributions to the development of China’s education. I wish the conference great success and everyone good health while they are in China. 
I would like to begin by thanking the various partners that have made this conference possible. First, I would like to thank the Global Development Network, with which we coordinated over the last three years so that we could hold our two conferences in the same place and at the same time, maximizing externalities between those two events. I would also like to thank our Chinese hosts, who have provided logistical and financial support for this conference, the large group of supporters from Peking University, and the many other groups whose participation and enthusiasm have made this event possible. 
For those of us from the World Bank, this Regional Bank Conference on Development Economics is an important event. It has evolved over the years into a major opportunity for the international research community to focus on development issues of specific relevance in various regions of the world. Its strength lies in bringing together academics from top universities in the world and in the region where the conference is being held. Today, we have participants from no less than a dozen countries, including, of course, a sizable number from East Asia. 
The focus of this conference—higher education and development—is a topic of unquestionable importance for this region and for middle-income countries in general. At relatively low levels of national development, education policy is concentrated, although not exclusively, on broadening the access to and improving the quality of primary education, an emphasis embedded in the United Nations Millennium Development Goals, which seek to achieve universal primary education by 2015. 
But as development proceeds, economic growth brings with it structural transformation that creates growing demand for workers with increasingly higher levels of education, shifting the emphasis from the primary to the secondary level and, increasingly, the university level, often with quite specialized skill profiles. Much of whatFrançois Bourguignon, at the time of this conference, was senior vice president and chief economist of the World Bank In October 2007 he became director of the Paris School of Economics. 
Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics 2008, Regional  2008 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank 
13 
Opening Address 
FRANÇOIS BOURGUIGNON 
14 | FRANÇOIS BOURGUIGNON 
Minister Wu just said about China illustrates that fantastic transformation and the growing emphasis that has to be put on higher education. 
From that point of view, it is quite interesting that—and I learned this today—the World Bank’s first loan to China was made exactly 26 years ago, and it was done for higher education. Before entering this room, Minister Wu told me about the various World Bank loans for higher education that have benefited China. So, from that point of view, a conference on higher education that is organized by the World Bank and held in Beijing is a natural fit. 
But while the move across educational levels may seem a natural progression for the development process, the transition raises difficult and often vexing questions for policy makers. While primary education can easily be justified for the benefits and basic opportunities it generates for individuals, as well as the broader gains to society from a literate population, the issues become much more complex with higher levels of education. Issues such as who should pay for education, how it should be provided, and how the challenge of the brain drain from higher-skilled occupations should be managed all require special consideration. 
The sessions and keynote speeches that have been organized for this conference are intended to shed some light on these difficult issues. Topics that address how to organize the higher education sector will focus on the financing of higher education and the challenges and opportunities of getting public and private education providers to work together. The role of skills migration and whether it leads to brain drain or, as we say today, “brain circulation,” will also be considered. How best to organize higher education institutions to support innovation will be considered in another session. And, finally, the role of labor markets and institutions in facilitating or, in some cases, hindering the accumulation and use of higher education will be examined. 
We are beginning a two-day conference on an extremely important topic. We have assembled a diverse group of experts to help us to understand the options in the field of higher education. I expect that we will learn a great deal from one another over the next two days. 
Without further fanfare, let me again welcome you all to this Regional Bank Conference on Development Economics. I look forward to our collective engagement during this time together. 
This brief note deals with a subject that lies close to the hearts of the Global Development Network and the World Bank’s Development Economic Vice Presidency: the training and employment of highly skilled labor. Arguably the largest single contrast between developed and developing countries lies in the availability and use of highly skilled labor. One might not want to argue that it is the only cause of the differences in their economic, social, and political outcomes, but it clearly is a major contributor, and successful development will require markets for highly skilled labor that operate with a reasonable degree of social efficiency. I specify social efficiency because there are good reasons to believe that skilled labor creates strong positive externalities, economically (for example, creating opportunities for others to be more productive), socially (delivering services whose value exceeds their cost or price), and even politically (strengthening institutions, improving debate, and enhancing accountability). 
This note advances four simple assertions, which are simple to make, if not to implement or achieve: 
● Universities are central to the training of highly skilled labor. 
● The so-called brain circulation is an important topic for research because, whether positive or negative, its effects are likely to be large. 
● Building capacity to undertake policy research in developing countries is both difficult and important for enhancing development. 
● Since labor is scarce and productive, we should not waste it. 
L. Alan Winters was director of the Development Research Group, the World Bank. He is now professor of economics in the University of Sussex, UK. This note is based on a speech given to the joint dinner of the Global Development Network’s Eighth Annual Conference and the World Bank’s Regional Conference on Development Economics, January 17, 2007, Beijing. The author is grateful to Shahid Yusuf for comments and to Audrey Kitson-Walters and Nina Cunanan for logistical help. 
Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics 2008, Regional  2008 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank 
15 
Keynote Address Skilled Labor and the International Economy: Whence It Comes, Whither It Goes 
L. ALAN WINTERS 
16 | L. ALAN WINTERS 
I do not offer detailed analysis of these propositions, still less assemble a large body of empirical evidence in their favor, but I hope to offer enough justification to persuade readers that they deserve thought and further research attention. 
The Centrality of Universities 
It is tautological to define universities as central to the creation of highly skilled labor if we define “highly skilled” as having a particular level of undergraduate study, a postgraduate degree, or a certificate issued by a university.1 I want to go beyond tautology and recognize that other routes to high skills are conceivable and, indeed, necessary for some skills; even so, it is plain that almost every highly skilled worker builds on his or her university education. If a country’s universities are closed or short of staff and facilities and if they cannot be substituted for by universities abroad, the level of practical skills within that country is bound to decline. 
Initially, universities were almost exclusively training institutions for high-level professions, especially the church and the law. Their extension to sciences and engineering, which on current views represent the apex of the pyramid of high skills, was a nineteenth-century phenomenon, led by people such as Humboldt (see Yusuf and Nabeshima 2006: chap. 1). From around 1980, however, development theory and practice turned against supporting universities as a means to development in lowincome countries and in favor of boosting primary and, more recently, secondary school enrollment. At the time, this attitude seemed well justified in terms of equity: universities were the preserve of the (currently) rich, and the unit costs of university education were high, whereas primary education would help to unlock the capacities of all. Moreover, since primary education was necessary for students to advance to secondary and tertiary levels, extending the former’s enrollment would enhance the benefits of the latter by increasing the pool from which they could draw. Secondary enrollment was later justified as a necessary step to obtaining tertiary education for some and as a key to improving manufacturing productivity. 
As we enter the twenty-first century, however, the earlier stages of education are generally starting to show stronger enrollment, and the emphasis in economic performance is increasingly on the quality of education, skills, innovation, and flexibility (Hanushek and Woessmann 2007). As a result, it is now widely accepted that the neglect of universities has been allowed to go too far Developing countries are seeking to boost their universities and to define their role in promoting development (see, for example, Hershberg, Nabeshima, and Yusuf 2007, which deals with universityindustry linkages in Asia and a similar project under way in the World Bank for Africa). Moreover, in many cases the impetus is as much from the private as from the public sector. 
Nowhere is progress faster than in India and China, where expenditure, university formation, and student enrollment are all booming. In India, the number of colleges and universities has increased from around 5,000 to 12,000 since 1990; there are now 3 million graduates per year, of whom 400,000 are engineers (United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization, UNESCO). In China, 
SKILLED LABOR AND THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY | 17 
between 1997 and 2005, the number of ‘regular’ higher education institutions nearly doubled to 1792 , and admissions to all tertiary institutions quintupled from about 1.1 million to 5.7 million. Admissions to post-graduate degree courses numbers 365 thousand. Of nearly a million first degree students in 2003, over half studied science and engineering subjects. (All these statistics are from Li and others 2008.) 
These numbers are staggering and seem to suggest that India and China will shortly swamp the global market for graduates and engineers. But, in fact, that is not true. First, both countries are faced with rapidly rising domestic demand. In India, experienced software engineers and managers more generally are beginning to command salaries on the same order of magnitude as in the United States and, especially, Europe. In China, the demand for skills in general management, teaching, and public administration is strong enough to absorb all of the graduates produced well into the future (Winters and Yusuf 2007). 
Second, there are questions about quality. Both India and China have some excellent institutions of learning, but they also have many very weak ones, with poor curricula, poor standards, and weak links between learning outcomes and qualifications granted. The McKinsey Institute (2005) argues that only 25 percent of Indian and 10 percent of Chinese engineering graduates have the skills required to work at their nominal skill level in an international company. Some of this reflects language difficulties and immobility for noneconomic reasons, but much reflects weak curricula, inadequately trained and motivated teaching staff, and the lack of effective measures for enforcing quality. 
Thus, while increasing global supply will presumably constrain the rates of return to tertiary education somewhat, they are likely to remain high enough to warrant more training efforts and expenditure in both developed and developing countries well into the current century (see, for example, Freeman 2006). 
The Brain Drain Warrants More Research 
Creating a stock of highly skilled labor is not the same as keeping and using it, and these are the issues I turn to now. Highly skilled workers are highly mobile, both nationally and internationally. They generally provide services that their host communities want (for example, medicine) or that create better jobs for locals (for example, engineering design), and they face fewer challenges in integrating into these communities. Highly skilled workers generally have the means to move, being less prone to liquidity constraints, and greater ability to find jobs outside their home country because, compared with less-skilled workers, they have better networks and their jobs are more frequently subject to advertising and explicit qualifications. 
We do not know yet whether—or, perhaps more precisely, under which circumstances— the loss of highly skilled labor (the brain drain) is detrimental or beneficial. Strong arguments have been made on both sides of this debate, and the answer is almost certainly context specific. Commander, Kangasniemi, and Winters (2004) offer one of several surveys that have been undertaken, and I do not repeat the arguments here. I just want to make two separate points that have long fascinated me. 
18 | L. ALAN WINTERS 
First, given that there are economies of agglomeration in use of the most highly skilled labor, I hypothesize that a threefold classification of countries is significant. India and China have, respectively, the third and sixth largest overseas diasporas of skilled labor (graduate level and above) in the world (Docquier and Marfouk 2005). The others in the top six are, in declining size, the United Kingdom, the Philippines, Mexico, and Germany. However, as a percentage of all graduates, the émigrés account for 4.3 percent for India and 3.8 percent for China. Provided that there is not huge positive selection (that is, that not only the very brightest leave), these are probably manageable proportions. In other words, India and China are probably large enough that no plausible amount of emigration to developed countries will undermine their ability to create viable agglomerations of skills. Brain drain could still raise issues about who pays for training, but the effects are essentially marginal. 
Now consider, say, Jamaica and Guyana, where 85 and 89 percent, respectively, of nationals (defined as having been born there) with degrees reside abroad. The provision of high-level services may suffer in these economies, but realistically they are so small that efficiently sized agglomerations of high skills probably would never emerge. Again, there may be losses on the margin, but it is plausible that the only efficient thing for Guyanese high-fliers to do is to relocate abroad, even in terms of social efficiency.2 Finally, consider, say, Ghana (population 22 million) or Mozambique (19 million). These economies might aspire to agglomerations of skills in certain sectors, and the brain drain—47 and 45 percent, respectively, of all national degree holders reside abroad—may prevent them from emerging. In these middle-size economies, the effect of the brain drain might not be marginal—that is, it might induce a different type of equilibrium. 
This hypothesis applies, if at all, to the highest levels of skill. At lower levels of graduate attainment, agglomeration economies are probably less strong but still positive, and so brain drain concerns may arise for smaller countries. Mauritius (population 1.5 million) is said to have difficulty transitioning to a more knowledgeintensive economic structure because of the shortage of skills. Even in the provision of primary health care, there may be some agglomeration effects in terms of learning and peer groups, which seem a priori to have constant returns to scale above a very low threshold core. 
The second point I want to make is that the possibility of migration may affect the propensity to become highly skilled and hence the stock of highly skilled workers remaining in a country. This was first observed formally in the “beneficial brain drain” literature stemming from Mountford (1997). Migration raises the return to education. If, starting from zero, the probability of a skilled person migrating increases to p, the expected returns to education increase by pD, where D is the difference in skilled labor earnings at home and abroad. If this increases the proportion obtaining education by q, the number of people with education in the home economy will increase if (1 q) (1 p), that is, if more people start to obtain an education at home than leave. 
Several conditions are required for this argument to apply—for example, that training places are not rationed as they often are for, say, doctors (that is, that education numbers can actually increase) and that p applies equally to anyone who gets 
SKILLED LABOR AND THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY | 19 
educated (see Commander, Kangasniemi, and Winters 2004). The latter condition essentially means that overseas employers do not screen out the people who took education only because the possibility of migration had been introduced. If, as seems possible, the brightest would have found it worthwhile to get educated anyway, whereas the “second division” required the incentives of extra rewards to make it worthwhile, this amounts to saying that overseas employers cannot or do not screen by ability. My recent work with colleagues suggests that screening and the apparent insensitivity of education decisions to migration make the beneficial brain drain unlikely to apply to doctors (Kangasniemi, Winters, and Commander 2004), whereas for information technology specialists, the hypothesis seems quite plausible (Commander and others 2008). 
A further wrinkle is that the beneficial brain drain can operate in reverse. McKenzie and Rapoport (2006) have shown that the opportunity to migrate to the United States to do an unskilled job is reducing secondary school enrollment among Mexican males. Giles and de Brauw (2006) have identified the same phenomenon in rural-urban internal migration in China. 
Building Capacity for Policy Research 
This section is more parochial than the rest of the paper. It is predicated on the assertion—I would like to say “fact”—that developing countries, especially the poorest, would benefit from greater capacity to analyze policy options in a rigorous, research-based fashion, especially in the areas of economic and social policy. Building such capacity is, in my opinion, the most important of the Global Development Network’s objectives, and it is shared by the World Bank. 
Policy research capacity entails more than just tertiary education.3 It requires highly skilled researchers and experienced project managers, incentives for policy to be subjected to rigorous high-quality analysis, and the existence of institutions that can provide the environment and tools for research and provide continuity so that the whole enterprise does not collapse if a single individual leaves. 
The problem is that policy research suffers from weak market incentives and sometimes from market failures in the classical sense. Thus there is a public good element to policy research: why not just let someone else do it? In addition, the international publishability and kudos of policy research often fall short of those of theory, methodology, and tests of apparently universal hypotheses; developing countries often cannot generate the volume of policy research needed to make developing tools and institutions to simplify it seem worthwhile; the return on policy research is also uncertain and difficult to pin down; governments are sometimes hostile to independent research; and successful researchers are often bid away by the private sector or by government so that institutions and cultures of policy research never take root. There is nothing wrong with talented people working in the private sector or in government—indeed, we should encourage it— but society also benefits from the presence of an established independent research capacity. 
20 | L. ALAN WINTERS 
How should we tackle these weaknesses? The market failures suggest that there is a case for public support, so this is partly a matter of how institutions like the Global Development Network and the World Bank should spend their money. A necessary input is training and longer-term mentoring of policy researchers in developing countries: not just degrees and general research skills, but also training oriented toward the intricacies of real policy. The provision of tools is important, too, such as access to library facilities, data, and analytical tools with which to carry out relatively standard analyses. Nearly all researchers draw on networks of peers, partly for support (validation that what they do is worthwhile), partly for advice and support on approaches, and partly as stimuli and competition (which is uncomfortable at times but nearly always constructive). It is also important to give researchers individual incentives for good work. Researchers rarely seek riches, but relatively small rewards can greatly increase their motivation and also their self-esteem and status within society. Finally, supporters of capacity building must recognize the importance of institutions: supporting their development, being prepared to pay some part of their overhead, and sticking with them over difficult patches. 
This shopping list is formidable. It is clearly expensive and long term, and it requires a great deal of judgment, confidence, patience, and resilience on the part of the donors. It requires far more than the research support budgets of the Global Development Network and the World Bank but is, I believe, very worthwhile indeed. It is a call to international donors to approach capacity building in consistent and determined ways, which we have seen in the past (see the example in SIDA 2006), but on a broader front than heretofore. 
Making Efficient Use of Skilled Labor 
René Descartes said, “It is not enough to have a good mind; the main thing is to use it well.” So it is for countries. The previous sections deal essentially with the supply of highly skilled labor. This final section deals with demand. It urges us not to waste the skilled labor that we have. 
One possible problem in the market for highly skilled labor is a lack of demand: people obtain skills but find no productive use for them. It has been a criticism of many developing countries in the past that their productive structures and methods of production generate too few skilled jobs. This can be the case particularly after periods of conflict and destruction. The problem may be manifest in brain waste (people not using the skills they have), brain drain (people leaving), or unemployment. An unemployed elite can pose serious problems for political stability as well as simple waste. 
The solutions to deficient demand will vary from country to country, but they will include allowing wages to clear the market (that is, labor market flexibility) even if this discourages the acquisition of skills, ensuring the realistic pricing of tertiary education (which presumably will discourage the acquisition of at least some skills), relaxing the barriers to the creation of firms and entrepreneurship of either a bureaucratic (regulatory) or economic (for example, access to finance) nature, encouraging demand for certain services associated with externalities (for example, the provision of health 
SKILLED LABOR AND THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY | 21 
or education services), providing integrated training to meet the needs of specific industries, as the Japanese and Koreans did, and altering university courses to foster problem solving and innovation (see Bengt-Åke Lundvall’s paper in this volume). 
The main problem I want to address, however, is the obverse one: excessive demand for highly skilled labor for activities with low social returns (which could, of course, coexist with deficient demand in other sectors). I illustrate this with examples from two areas. 
First, the aid business. Rajan and Subramanian (2005) have argued from macro data that aid flows harm growth by bidding up the price of skilled labor. I do not find their results wholly convincing, but there is quite enough direct evidence of the burden that donor engagement places on poor countries’ analytical capacity to corroborate the dangers for skilled labor markets. For example, the fragmentation of aid flows, which is manifestly increasing (World Bank 2007), means that Tanzania’s government prepares about 2,000 documents for donors and receives more than 1,000 donor delegations each year (World Bank 2004). In some African countries, senior policy makers spend half or more of their time dealing with donors and international financial institutions (World Bank 2000). This is compared with the interpretation of surveys conducted by private sector firms, which generally hold that managements that spend 10 percent or more of their time dealing with governments are being unduly distracted from their proper functions. Not only does aid distract government officials, but it also diverts them into tasks whose priority may seem obvious to donors, but not to anyone else. In Kenya a World Bank agricultural project paid eight local staff $3,000 to $6,000 per month, compared with the $250 per month that senior economists could earn in the civil service. Of 20 Kenyan economists receiving a master’s degree from a donor-funded program over 1977–85, 15 were working for aid agencies or nongovernmental organizations by 1994 (World Bank 2004). Doubtless many did useful work, but the cost to Kenya’s ability to analyze and implement policy seems very high. 
The Paris Declaration of March 2005 aimed to improve the delivery of aid in many of these sorts of dimensions. To quantify its challenges and as a start toward measuring its impact, its authors (the OECD’s Development Assistance Committee) undertook a baseline survey in 2006. This suggested, for example, that less than a quarter of aid missions were conducted jointly by more than one donor. It also found that donors had established 1,767 parallel implementation units (World Bank 2007). And as the wider aid community, including nongovernmental organizations and foundations, becomes ever more enamored of vertical funds (for example, for acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, tuberculosis, primary education), the situation seems likely to worsen rather than improve. 
The second area in which I feel we waste scarce resources is one I know better: the trading system. Trade negotiations are very complex, but given their sensitivity domestically and the apparent power of the World Trade Organization (WTO) to impose its rules on the governments of small countries, governments take them very seriously. Thus if they do not trust their partners to respect their interests and realistically recognize that the WTO Secretariat cannot do so, they feel obliged to devote considerable resources to monitoring negotiations. A typical WTO week in Geneva has about fifty 
22 | L. ALAN WINTERS 
committee meetings. At the Hong Kong Ministerial Meeting in December 2005, the delegation of the European Union was said to number 832 people, that of the United States 356, and that of Japan 229 (World Development Movement Press Release, December 14, 2005). The World Development Movement bemoaned the asymmetry of the situation, which found, say, three Burundians trying to keep track of these hoards, and I agree. But is it better to be Uganda (with a population four times that of Burundi), which sent 66 people? Is this really an optimal use of the delegates’ time and attention, even if all of their other costs are paid for by donors? 
Even worse, in my opinion, is the effort that goes into negotiating regional trading arrangements. Prominent at the moment is the European Union initiative to negotiate economic partnership agreements with the Africa, Caribbean, and Pacific states, but think of the effort that has gone into the Free Trade Area of the Americas. On the whole, such regional arrangements offer developing countries very little and the world trading system less, and yet they are complex and detailed.4 I have never managed to persuade any government to estimate the direct costs of engaging in these negotiations (staff time and travel), let alone the indirect ones of political and bureaucratic distraction. Yet even a passing acquaintance with their duration and complexity suggests that the costs could be huge. 
Moreover, not only do negotiations absorb skilled policy capacity, but their outcome does as well. The Uruguay Round imposed on developing countries technical and health standards administration, customs valuation requirements, and a complex intellectual property regime, plus the need for increased regulatory oversight if services were to be liberalized. The donor community and economists also urge developing countries to integrate themselves more firmly in the operation of the trading system: do more at the WTO, make more use of dispute settlement, have greater participation in international standards bodies such as Codex Alimentarius to ensure that developing-country views are represented, and so forth. All of these absorb skilled labor but are rather bureaucratic in nature. If the best use of highly skilled labor is to send it to meetings in Geneva, we ought to ask how we came to make the environment so hostile for developing countries. 
In Winters (2001a) I make several suggestions to try to arrest and reverse this waste of resources. Predictably, they have had no effect. Here, with so many economists collected together, let me try another tack. As policy-focused economists, we are the principal beneficiaries of these make-work schemes: they bid up our rates. If we said “enough,” we might be heard.5 There would still be plenty of work for us to do, even if some of it were less glamorous (customs reform, say, instead of flying to Geneva), and it would probably be more useful. 
Conclusion 
Highly skilled labor is one of the magic ingredients of development, yet there is much we do not know about it or how to manage it. The research agenda about how to produce it and allocate it across space is large and challenging, but in the meantime, I can safely assert that we should not waste it. 
SKILLED LABOR AND THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY | 23 
Notes 
1. I have a fairly broad definition of university in mind here that would include tertiary institutions such as the grand écoles in France, even though they are formally separate from that country’s university system. 2. There is hardly any point in being the only nuclear physicist in Guyana. 3. This section draws on an unpublished note prepared by my colleague Bernard Hoekman 
on behalf of the Development Research Group in the World Bank. 4. I believe the limited value of economic partnership agreements was plain from the start. Indeed, it was implicit in the European Union’s own green paper on post-Lomé trading arrangements (European Commission 1997). Winters (2001b), written in 1987–88, summarizes my views and counterproposal. History has done nothing to change my mind. 5. G. H. Hardy is reported to have said, “If the Archbishop of Canterbury declares that he believes in God, that is all in the way of business, but if he declares that he does not, we may take it that he means what he says.” 
References 
Commander, Simon, Rupa Chanda, Mari Kangasniemi, and L. Alan Winters. 2008. “Must Skilled Migration Be a Brain Drain? Evidence from the Indian Software Industry.” The World Economy 31 (2, February): 187–211. Commander, Simon, Mari Kangasniemi, and L. Alan Winters. 2004. “The Brain Drain: Curse or Boon? A Survey of the Literature.” In Challenges to Globalization: Analyzing the Economics, ed. Robert E. Baldwin and L. Alan Winters. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research. Docquier, Frédérick, and Abdeslam Marfouk. 2006. “International Migration by Education Attainment, 1990–2000.” In International Migration, Remittances, and the Brain Drain, ed. Caglar Ozden and Maurice Schiff. Basingstoke: Palgrave McMillan. European Commission. 1997. Green Paper on Relations between the European Union and the ACP Countries on the Eve of the 21st Century: Challenges and Options for a New Partnership. Brussels: European Commission. Freeman, Richard B. 2006. “Is a Great Labor Shortage Coming? Replacement Demand in the Global Economy.” NBER Working Paper 12541, National Bureau for Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Giles, John, and Alan de Brauw. 2006. Migrant Opportunity and the Educational Attainment of Youth in Rural China. IZA Discussion Paper 2326. Bonn: Institute for the Study of Labor. Hanushek, Eric A., and Ludger Woessmann. 2007. “The Role of School Improvement in Economic Development.” NBER Working Paper 12832, National Bureau for Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Hershberg, Eric, Kaoru Nabeshima, and Shahid Yusuf, eds. 2007. “University-Industry Link
ages in Metropolitan Areas in Asia.” World Development 35 (6, June): 931–1098. Kangasniemi, Mari, L. Alan Winters, and Simon Commander. 2004. “Is the Medical Brain Drain Beneficial? Evidence from Overseas Doctors in the U.K.” Social Science and Medicine 65 (February): 915–23. Li, Yao, John Whalley, Shunming Zhang, and Xiliang Zhao. 2008. “The higher educational transformation of China and its global implications.” NBER Working Paper 13849, Cambridge, Mass. McKenzie, David, and Hillel Rapoport. 2006. “Can Migration Reduce Educational Attainment? Evidence from Mexico.” Policy Research Working Paper 3952, World Bank, Washington, DC, June. 
24 | L. ALAN WINTERS 
McKinsey Institute. 2005. The Emerging Global Labor Market. San Francisco: McKinsey and 
Company. Mountford, Andrew. 1997. “Can a Brain Drain Be Good for Growth in the Source Econo
my?” Journal of Development Economics 53 (2): 287–303. Rajan, Raghavan, and Arvind Subramanian. 2005. “What Undermines Aid’s Impact on Growth?” IMF Working Paper WP/05/126, International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C. SIDA (Swedish Development Cooperation Agency). 2006. Research Capacity: Towards the 
Millennium Goals. Stockholm: SIDA, Department for Research Cooperation. Winters, L. Alan. 2001a. “Harnessing Trade for Development.” In Making Globalization Work for the Poor: The European Contribution; The Need for Coherence. Stockholm: Ministry of Foreign Affairs. ———. 2001b. “Post-Lomé Trading Arrangements: The Multilateral Alternative.” In Regionalism in Europe: Geometries and Strategies after 2000, ed. Jürgen von Hagen and Mika Widgren. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Winters, L. Alan, and Shahid Yusuf. 2007. Dancing with Giants: China and India and the 
Global Economy. Washington, DC: World Bank; Singapore: Institute for Policy Studies. World Bank. 2000. Can Africa Claim the Twenty-first Century? Washington DC: World Bank. ———. 2004. World Development Report 2004: Making Services Work for Poor People. New 
York: Oxford University Press. ———. 2007. Global Monitoring Report, 2007: Confronting the Challenges of Gender Equal
ity and Fragile States. Washington, DC: World Bank. Yusuf, Shahid, and Kaoru Nabeshima. 2006. How Universities Promote Economic Growth. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. 
A lesson of basic economics is that understanding markets requires paying attention to both quantities and prices. Prices serve as a market signal about the costs of producing goods and services and possibly also about the relative scarcity of those goods and services. Thus analyzing the evolution of prices should reveal something about the evolution of technology and the tension between supply and demand. 
The higher education market is no exception. Much of the analysis of higher education in developing countries focuses on quantity—the share of the cohort going on to tertiary education—and sometimes also on the costs to the government or consumers of expanding that share. But equally important are the returns to higher education, which represent the relative price of the skills that come with tertiary education. Their level depends on the costs of higher education, but in disequilibrium the returns also rise or fall as gaps emerge or close between the supply of and demand for highly educated workers. These prices can provide essential signals of these tensions. 
This paper investigates three questions. First, do we see any common global trend (especially across the developing world) toward higher returns to higher education, as we saw in the United States in the 1970s and 1980s? If so, what is causing the trends in returns and is the trend likely to be structural or transitory? Finally, what policy issues have to be considered in responding to these trends, in particular to ensure that the supply of workers with a tertiary education can adjust upward? 
Trends in Returns 
This section brings together recent evidence on changes in the returns to tertiary education and reveals a widespread trend toward a widening wage premium for a university education. A word of caution is in order, however. Because of a lack of goodFrançois Bourguignon is director of the Paris School of Economics; he wrote this article when he was senior vice president and chief economist of the World Bank. F. Halsey Rogers is senior economist of the Development Research Group of the World Bank. 
Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics 2008, Regional  2008 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank 
25 
Keynote Address Global Returns to Higher Education: Trends, Drivers, and Policy Responses 
FRANÇOIS BOURGUIGNON AND F. HALSEY ROGERS 
26 | FRANÇOIS BOURGUIGNON AND F. HALSEY ROGERS 
trend data for a large number of countries, this conclusion is necessarily somewhat speculative. The same is true, only more so, for the answers to the other questions addressed below. The goal of this paper is to provoke discussion about trends; we do not expect full agreement on the diagnosis, let alone the prognosis. 
In thinking about trends in returns, it is useful to have the following basic framework in mind: 
(1) log wi rP*Pi rS*Si rH*Hi other variables, 
On the left-hand side, this equation has the log of earnings of an individual i in the population of wage earners. On the right-hand side, in this very simple formulation, there are three dummy variables, P, S, and H, which represent primary, secondary, and higher education, respectively. The coefficients associated with the variables, rP, rS, and rH, are the marginal returns to primary, secondary, and higher education. The question, then, is how earnings depend on those three levels of education, once we have controlled for other variables that influence the earnings of an individual: his or her age, the city, area, or region of a country in which he or she lives, and so on. 
The marginal return to higher education, in this equation, is defined by rH. That parameter represents exactly how much a university graduate earns on average (controlling for other characteristics), when compared to individuals with only a secondary school degree. This is the definition of “returns” used in this paper. (Note that it is not the usual Mincerian specification, where each year of schooling is assumed to yield the same return.) When the labor market is at equilibrium, this rH should be high enough to compensate the student for the costs of attending university—both the opportunity costs of the forgone earnings that the student would have obtained by going directly to the labor market and, of course, all of the direct private costs of higher education. 
A slightly more sophisticated specification of this equation would replace the variables P, S, and H with the number of years of education the worker has completed at the respective level of the educational system. In that case, the coefficients rP, rS, rH would represent the rates of return corresponding to each year of study at these different levels of education.1 
This equation allows us to better formulate the question of the trend in returns to higher education: how is this rH coefficient changing over time? To answer this question, we draw on analyses that have been carried out in many different countries. Let us start with two examples from our own research that illustrate what we have in mind. The first case is from Indonesia. Alatas and Bourguignon (2005) analyze the evolution of income distribution in that country, and part of the analysis relies on assessing the change in the earnings function in that country. One of the drivers of the change was the rH coefficient. Between 1980 and 1996, during the era of very rapid growth before the financial crisis struck in 1997, the return to getting a university degree—again, compared with a secondary degree only—rose from 40 to 60 percent. As there was no clear sign in this period of an increase in the cost of tertiary education, a natural conclusion in that the rapid-growth era led to a shortage of tortiary-educated workers and increased substantially the relative return to higher education. 
GLOBAL RETURNS TO HIGHER EDUCATION | 27 
FIGURE 1 Returns to Education for Urban Males in Colombia, 1988–95 
Colombia: change in returns to education 1988–1995 (urban males) 30 
25s gninraen ie gnahc15Source: Vélez and others (2005). 
The second example, taken from the same volume, examines the case of Colombia (Vélez and others 2005; see figure 1). The interpretation here is somewhat different: rather than seeing the rH from the Indonesian case, we instead have the change in labor market returns by years of education between 1988 and 1995. The horizontal axis gives the number of years of schooling, while the vertical axis represents the change between 1988 and 1995 in the earnings corresponding to each number of years of schooling, once we have controlled for other explanatory variables. 
The U-shape of this curve means that, during this period, both primary school graduates (on the left) and higher education graduates (on the right) gained relative to secondary school graduates, who are exactly in the middle of the distribution. By comparing the right-hand part of this parabola with the middle portion, we see that the return rH rose 15 to 20 percent between 1988 and 1995. 
In these two countries, then, there has been an increase in the return to higher education in the recent period. These examples also illustrate the importance of being precise about the period we are examining. In the case of Colombia, for example, if instead of looking at the 1988–95 period, we look at the preceding decade, we would see not a U-shaped curve but a downward-sloping one. In that earlier period, in other words, the relative return to higher education declined. Thus the timing of the analysis is very important. 
Does this pattern of increasing returns generalize to other countries? Table 1 summarizes the results of a number of studies that have analyzed trends in returns to higher education. 
In the case of the United States, the increase in the college wage premium has been the subject of extensive research. The literature burgeoned in the 1990s, as 2010% 50 51 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Years of schooling 
TABLE 1. Trends in Relative Returns to Tertiary Education in Developing Countries during the 1980s and 1990s 
Trend in relative returns to tertiary Region and country education, 1980s–90sa Source 
Developing and transition economies Latin America 
Argentina Increase De Ferranti and others (2003) Bolivia Increase De Ferranti and others (2003) Brazil (urban) Increase De Ferranti and others (2003) Brazil Increase Arabsheibani, Carneiro, and Henley (2006) Chile Flat De Ferranti and others (2003) Colombia Increase De Ferranti and others (2003); Vélez and others 
(2005); Blom and Hansen (2002) Mexico Increase De Ferranti and others (2003); Legovini, Bouillón, 
and Lustig (2005); López-Acevedo (2001) Venezuela Flat Patrinos and Sakellariou (2004) 
East Asia 
China Increase Li (2003) China-Taipei Increase Bourguignon, Fournier, and Gurgand (2005) China-Taipei Flat Vere (2005) Indonesia Increase Alatas and Bourguignon (2005) 
Eastern Europe 
Czech Rep. Increase Chase (1998); Munich, Svejnar, and Terrell (2005) Russia Increase Gorodnichenko and Sabirianova Peter (2005) Slovakia Increase Chase (1998) Ukraine Increase Gorodnichenko and Sabirianova Peter (2005) 
High-income economies (OECD) Australia Flat Malagen (1994)b; Borland and others (2000)b Austria Decrease Brunello, Comi, and Lucifora (2000); Fersterer and 
Winter-Ebmer (2003) Denmark Increase Brunello, Comi, and Lucifora (2000) Finland Flat Brunello, Comi, and Lucifora (2000) France Flat Brunello, Comi, and Lucifora (2000) Germany Flat Brunello, Comi, and Lucifora (2000) Greece Decrease (1980s), Tsaklogou and Cholezas (2005)b 
increase (1990s) Italy Increase Brunello, Comi, and Lucifora (2000) Netherlands Flat Brunello, Comi, and Lucifora (2000) Norway (1980s) Flat Hoegeland, Klette, and Salvanes (1999) Portugal Increase Cardoso (2004)b Sweden (1980s) Decrease Palme and Wright (1998) Sweden (1990s) Increase Gustavsson (2004)b Switzerland Increase Brunello, Comi, and Lucifora (2000) United Kingdom Increase Brunello, Comi, and Lucifora (2000) United States Increase Fortin (2006) 
a. Refers to tertiary returns relative to returns to secondary education. 
b. As cited in Machin and McNally (2007). These works are not included in the reference list. See Machin and McNally (2007) for the full citations. 
28 
GLOBAL RETURNS TO HIGHER EDUCATION | 29 
researchers tried to explain the rapid increase in the premium in the late 1970s and throughout the 1980s. Since then, the college premium has continued to rise in the United States, and several other high-income countries have shown a similar pattern. While this is a broad trend, table 1 shows that it is not universal among Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries. In Austria, both the relative and the absolute returns to higher education decreased during the 1980s and 1990s. There is some evidence that the same happened in both Greece and Sweden in the 1980s, although in Sweden the largest declines in returns apparently took place in the previous decade.2 Below, we return to a possible explanation for these exceptions to the trend of rising relative returns. 
In the case of middle-income countries, information on trends in the college wage premium is most abundant for Latin America, thanks in large part to a recent flagship publication by the World Bank’s Latin America division (de Ferranti and others 2003). Table 1 shows that in several Latin American countries—Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, and Mexico—the relative rate of return to higher education rose in recent years. Again, this trend was not universal: in Chile and Venezuela, relative returns were stagnant, for reasons explored below. 
In East Asia, the college premium appears to be rising in China, as might be expected in the wake of that country’s economic transition. In an examination of trends in China-Taipei, the evidence is mixed: Bourguignon, Fournier, and Gurgand (2005) found that returns rose from the 1980s up through the mid-1990s, although a study incorporating more recent data suggests that the widening of the premium has stopped (Vere 2005). A third East Asian case is Indonesia, where, as noted, relative returns grew substantially during the 1980s and first half of the 1990s. 
Finally, the relative returns to higher education have increased substantially in some countries in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, probably in part because the economic transition in the region stimulated the demand for skills. 
Unfortunately, we lack estimates of trends for most other developing countries, often because of the dearth of consistent time-series data on tertiary returns. Clearly there is much more to learn. We would like to know, in particular, whether returns are also increasing in low-income countries. Nevertheless, the evidence currently avai lable suggests that in many countries the relative returns to higher education tended to increase in the 1980s and 1990s. Furthermore, based on this limited evidence, the trend appears to be even more consistent in the middle-income countries than in the OECD. 
Drivers of Higher Returns 
What is driving the increase in the college wage premium across many countries? There are two main possibilities. The first is that the costs of providing a tertiary education have risen relative to the costs of providing a secondary education. The second is that in many countries the demand for tertiary skills has grown faster than their supply, so their price—the relative salaries of college-educated workers—has been bid up. In this section, we argue that increasing relative costs are unlikely to be 
30 | FRANÇOIS BOURGUIGNON AND F. HALSEY ROGERS 
the explanation; the remainder of the paper therefore focuses on the second possibility, the disequilibrium between demand and supply. 
Whether this disequilibrium is transitory and self-equilibrating or more permanent is a crucial issue for education policy. If it is transitory, then higher college wage premiums are a signal that elicits greater investment in higher education and leads to a more productive society in the long run. But if rigidities in the education system or economy sustain the disequilibrium for an extended period of time, higher premiums will have the effect of exacerbating inequalities without inducing a beneficial supplyside response. 
Do Rising Costs of Tertiary Education Explain the Increasing College Wage Premium? 
Directly assessing the first possibility for a large number of countries is difficult, particularly in the case of developing and transition economies. For example, a major task force convened by the World Bank several years ago to analyze higher education in developing countries had little to say about the costs of higher education, other than to bemoan the “lack of data on education costs” at the tertiary level (World Bank 2000). 
But there are reasons to doubt that the costs of higher education have increased dramatically relative to the costs of secondary education. One factor that could spur rising tertiary costs is Baumol’s cost disease (Baumol 1967): if productivity in the economy as a whole is rising, relative costs will increase in any sector that does not make significant productivity gains. Because the technology of tertiary education appears at first blush to have changed little in recent decades, we might expect real costs of tertiary education to rise. However, given that secondary education suffers from sluggish productivity growth for the same reasons, this factor is unlikely to have raised the real relative costs of tertiary education. 
Even if the relative costs of providing a tertiary education have not risen sharply, the relative costs paid by the student and his or her family could have. For this story to be correct, there would have to have been a widespread shifting of costs from the public sector onto households, either through an increase in the enrollment share of private universities or through higher tuition and fees at public universities. Data from the OECD are mixed on this question. While the private share of direct higher education expenses was stable in a majority of OECD countries between the early 1990s and 2003, several, including Australia, Canada, Italy, and Mexico, among others, saw the private share increase by more than 10 percentage points (Karkkainnen 2006). We do not know of similar estimates covering a wide sample of developing and transition countries. But a public-to-private demand shift of this order of magnitude is not large enough to explain the increases in college wage premium observed in many of the countries listed in Table 1.3 
Consequently, it appears that the main driver is an imbalance between demand and supply, with the increase in college wage premium reflecting a growing gap between the two, as argued for the United States by Goldin and Katz (2007). Either 
GLOBAL RETURNS TO HIGHER EDUCATION | 31 
demand for skilled and educated workers has increased very rapidly—much more rapidly than supply, that is—or else supply has stagnated. 
Why the Drivers Matter for Policy 
Understanding the sources of higher returns is crucial, not only for predicting future trends, but also for designing policy. On the demand side, there is considerable evidence (discussed below) that the demand for skilled labor is rising for technical reasons, either because the skill requirements of production processes within given sectors are rising or because the economy is shifting toward sectors of production that make greater use of skilled labor. Assuming that demand will continue to shift, then any adjustment that might reduce the college wage premium will probably have to take place on the supply side of the market. This supply side is the focus of the remainder of this paper. 
Depending on the dynamics of the supply response, either of two cases could hold sway. The first is the self-equilibrating case: in the face of imbalances between demand and supply that are raising the returns to higher education, we might expect a surge in the supply of skilled workers as students or workers try to take advantage of those higher returns. This case has several implications. First, the key features of the current disequilibrium situation—the trend toward higher returns to tertiary education and the widening inequality between skilled and unskilled workers (or highly skilled and less highly skilled workers)—should prove to be temporary. Second, if the demand is governed by increases or changes in technical factors, the rapid supply response will allow the economy as a whole to take advantage of the increase in productivity that lies behind the increase in demand for skills. Third, if highly skilled people have positive externalities that benefit less skilled people, then this case may be consistent with a rapid growth path for the economy. 
The second, less encouraging, case might be called the growth-limiting equilibrium. Assume instead that the response by the supply side is weak—for example, because of restrictions on the growth of the tertiary sector—so that few workers are able to take advantage of the outward shift in demand by earning those higher-skill returns. In this case, the initial increase in inequality may prove permanent, and economic growth may stagnate. 
Clearly, making good policy will depend on understanding which of these cases applies in a given context. Are the high college wage premiums structural or merely transitory? If the increase in returns is expected to persist only temporarily until a robust tertiary sector has time to respond by increasing supply, then no further government response may be necessary. But if the growth-limiting case applies, a more vigorous role for government may be necessary. 
The Race between Demand for and Supply of Skills 
What is the evidence on those drivers of higher returns? A large number of studies have been done on the OECD countries, starting with the United States. As noted, 
32 | FRANÇOIS BOURGUIGNON AND F. HALSEY ROGERS 
this literature has tended to show a global trend toward rising demand for skills. But within individual countries, trends in returns to skills depend on a complex and country-specific interaction of supply and demand. On the demand side, some shifts are linked to technological change, while others are linked to changes in the central structure of those economies. To see how these shifts affect returns, of course, we have to take into account supply features that are linked to the functioning of the university system and its capacity to respond to changes in prices. This capacity is highly context specific, which may explain why the same general global trend toward rising demand for skills has different consequences in different countries. 
And, of course, the functioning of the labor market itself and the country’s labor market policies are important. A recent paper by Card and DiNardo (2002) challenges the widely held view that the changes in the skills gap are best explained by skills-biased technical change. Instead, they stress the effects of the drop in the relative value of the minimum wage; according to this view, the increase in returns to higher education primarily would reflect changes not at the top but at the bottom of the distribution. 
Nevertheless, the preponderance of the literature suggests that if the supply of tertiary-educated people were held constant, then in most countries the relative returns to tertiary education would be rising. A recent reexamination of the evidence by Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2005) reaffirms the view that skill-biased technical change is responsible for observed shifts in wage distribution, including increases in the college wage premium. 
Although no such sophisticated analysis of the demand side is available for most developing countries, several good studies have focused on the supply side. Two cases from Latin America—Brazil and Chile—suffice to illustrate how diverging patterns of supply response can lead to widely different changes in wages. 
Figure 2 shows the evolution of relative supply of and wages for highly skilled workers in Brazil since the 1960s. Specifically, the relative wage is the wage for workers with higher education relative to the wage for those with only secondary education, while relative supply is the number of people in the labor force with higher education versus the number of people in the labor force with only secondary education. 
Relative wages of highly skilled workers rose substantially in the 1980s and 1990s in Brazil, while the relative supply of those workers declined. In Brazil, therefore, increases in the college wage premium seem to have been caused not by strong growth in demand but rather by slow growth in the relative supply of skills. As a consequence, we would expect the rise in relative wages to be accompanied by relatively low growth rates in the economy, which is exactly what occurred in Brazil. This is consistent with the view that a major constraint on the Brazilian economy over the last three or four decades has been some sluggishness in the evolution of the supply of highly educated workers. 
The Chilean case tells a very different story (see figure 3). As the demand for skills has grown rapidly in Chile, the relative supply of highly educated workers has also shot up. As a result, the wage of university-educated workers relative to that of secondary-educated workers has changed little over the past four decades. In Chile a strong surge in supply—whether in response to the demand for skills or as an 
GLOBAL RETURNS TO HIGHER EDUCATION | 33 
FIGURE 2 Relative Supply and Relative Wages of University Graduates in Urban Brazil, 1982–98 
1006040200 
Source: De Ferranti and others (2003). 
1006040200 
Urban Brazil 200 
180160 
140 
0 01120 
Relative wages 
1 89180 
Relative supply 
1982 
1984 
1986 
1988 
1990 
1992 
1994 
1996 
1998 Year of survey 
FIGURE 3 Relative Supply and Relative Wages of University Graduates in Chile, 1966–98 
Source: De Ferranti and others (2003). 
Chile200180160 
140 
0 01120 
80 
Relative wages 
1966 
Relative supply 
7 6911970 
1974 
1978 
1982 
1986 
1990 
1994 
1998 Year of survey 
34 | FRANÇOIS BOURGUIGNON AND F. HALSEY ROGERS 
autonomous increase in supply—prevented a big increase in relative wages from taking place and may have permitted faster growth.4 
What do we learn from the Brazilian and Chilean cases? First, although the global tendency has been for relative tertiary returns to increase over the past two decades, the country-specific trends are just that—very country specific. Flat or even declining premiums in a particular country do not necessarily signify that the demand-side drivers of higher returns are not operating in that country. A second point—a corollary of the first—is that the drivers of returns vary across countries, but that the supply side of the higher education market is an important determinant of returns. 
Policy Issues 
Given this brief analysis, how can policy makers in developing countries best respond to rising returns to tertiary education? Because of the country specificity of both diagnosis and prognosis, and the paucity of evidence on the drivers of returns in particular developing countries, we cannot lay out a concrete set of policy prescriptions. Instead, we identify several issues for governments to consider as they respond. 
If we accept the hypothesis of global skill-biased technical change, then the appropriate response to increases in returns to higher education is to focus on the supply side. The policy objective of increasing the supply of skills would not be to drive down the returns to tertiary education.5 Instead, governments should aim to respond appropriately to the forces for higher productivity and growth that lie behind this rising college premium. From an economic perspective, rising returns mean that higher education skills are becoming more productive, and so the rational response—the response that improves economic efficiency and accelerates economic growth—is to increase the supply of highly educated people. Doing so entails three steps: investing public resources for tertiary education efficiently; expanding the pipeline of qualified entrants into tertiary schools; and assuring quality of both publicly and privately provided tertiary education. Together, they constitute an agenda for ensuring that the tertiary sector can respond flexibly and efficiently to higher demand for skills. 
Investing Efficiently in Tertiary Education 
If the tertiary education system is functioning well and is able to expand without additional government action, then no further policy response may be necessary. In that case, over time, as the supply of tertiary graduates increases, the differential in earnings will progressively be reduced. By contrast, if the tertiary education sector is unable to train enough graduates efficiently, then other responses may be necessary. The most straightforward policy response might be to increase government funding for higher education. A recent analysis by Fortin (2006) shows that within the United States the college wage premium increased most rapidly in the 1990s in those states where public expenditures on higher education were the lowest in the 1980s. This 
GLOBAL RETURNS TO HIGHER EDUCATION | 35 
result supports the view that government funding for higher education is indeed both an important determinant of wage premiums and a way to take advantage of the productivity gains that lie behind rising premiums. Other OECD examples in table 1 are also suggestive of the role played by government spending in increasing supply. Austria and Sweden, which saw decreasing returns in either the 1980s or 1990s, were two of the three European Union (EU) countries with the highest public spending per student on tertiary education in 1997. According to de la Fuente and Jimeno (2005), Austria spent 42 percent of GDP per capita for each tertiary student, and Sweden spent 58 percent, compared with the EU average of 34 percent. In the case of Norway, too, Hoegeland, Klette, and Salvanes (1999) credit a “remarkable expansion of the Norwegian educational system” with having kept the college wage premium from rising in the face of growing demand for skills in the 1980s. 
These OECD results are suggestive. To design policy for developing countries, however, will require not only carrying out comparable assessments for those countries but also, crucially, identifying the most efficient ways of spending government money. Developing and transition nations face much tighter resource constraints than OECD countries and so can ill afford to waste resources in an attempt to meet the growing demand for skills. Using these resources efficiently will require answering several sets of questions: 
● One key issue is the selection challenge. How can we ensure that, in subsidizing the higher education system, we are attracting the most talented students from all strata of society, not just students who have gone through some kind of social screening process? Efficient use of public resources requires spending them on the right students. 
● A second issue is internal efficiency. How do we provide education to any given set of students as efficiently as possible? In answering this question, it is not only the relative wage premium for tertiary graduates (relative to secondary graduates, that is) that matters. Once we begin to discuss the use of public funds, the issue of absolute returns to public spending becomes important. We have to take into account such issues as the public costs of education, the size of any externalities, and the likelihood of brain drain of highly skilled workers. We have to look at the production function for education and eliminate any inefficiencies. 
● The third issue is the structure of financing. What is the optimal combination of tuition fees, scholarships, and loans? The answer depends, in part, on how much the social returns to tertiary education differs from the private returns for the student. But it also depends on such factors as the risk tolerance of students from low-income families. Even if expected private returns are high, the student may not be willing to bear the risk of borrowing for his education, and society may have an interest in subsidizing his enrollment for distributional reasons. 
These are just a few examples of the efficiency considerations that must be taken into account when governments respond to the signal of rising returns by subsidizing tertiary education. 
36 | FRANÇOIS BOURGUIGNON AND F. HALSEY ROGERS 
Expanding the Pipeline of Students 
In the case of lowand middle-income countries, thinking about higher education policies should lead us inevitably back to the secondary education system. Without an increase in access to and quality of the secondary schools that produce candidates for tertiary schools, it will not be possible to take full advantage of the productivity gains signaled by the higher college wage premium. 
This policy thrust may initially have results that seem counterproductive. If we start by investing more in secondary education, the university wage premium is likely to increase initially, simply because the supply of workers with secondary education will increase relative to the supply of those with a university education. Only in the second stage, when more of those secondary school graduates attain a university degree (and assuming again that access to tertiary education is meritocratic), will it be possible to exploit the productivity differential signaled by higher college premiums. To borrow an analogy from international trade, we might expect this policy to lead to an inverse J-curve in the university wage premium—an increase over the first few years, but then a decrease over the longer run. 
Ensuring Quality 
A final important issue concerns the regulation of tertiary education. In some countries where we have observed a large increase in the returns to higher education, we have seen a simultaneous increase in the number of private providers of higher education. Those providers have done well financially, in the sense that they have created profitable businesses. And under the right conditions, growth of the private sector may be an effective way of meeting the increased demand for skills, so opening up opportunities for that growth is an important policy response. 
But liberalization of the sector must go hand in hand with effective regulation. Too often, graduates of these new tertiary institutions earn less than the graduates of more established universities do. This gap may simply reflect the lower quality of the students matriculating at the new private universities, but it may also reflect poor educational quality. If prospective students have poor information about the quality of the education or if the state provides significant financing for these private schools, then there will be good arguments for having a government role in ensuring quality or certifying higher education institutions. Note that the response is not likely to be for the state to reassert its former role as the sole provider of tertiary education, but instead for it to take on more effectively its new role as regulator of the sector. This step may be necessary to increase the likelihood that scarce resources for tertiary education are being well used.6 
A Caveat: Coping with Brain Drain 
Our discussion has implicitly assumed that the market for skills is closed. That is, we have assumed that, while the sources of increased demand could be international—for example, if greater import competition in product markets increases the efficiency of domestic firms—the domestic supply of and demand for skills are what determine the 
GLOBAL RETURNS TO HIGHER EDUCATION | 37 
equilibrium wage for skilled labor. But international migration could also contribute to the rising college wage premium in middle-income countries. If there is growing international mobility of highly skilled labor, then the returns to higher education within a particular country will reflect that mobility. If skilled workers in China or India can more easily get higher-paying jobs in the United States or Europe, for example, then those workers will need to be offered comparably high wages at home to persuade them not to emigrate. In that case, rising relative returns in developing countries (though not in developed countries) could be explained by a supply effect—with the brain drain, the supply of skilled labor has shifted up and is horizontal at the international wage for skilled labor. 
In this case, assessing policy options is more complicated. The supply side may respond by increasing the number of skilled workers, but if the sending country is small relative to world supply and demand, then this supply response will have no effect on the wage differential. If we accept theories of the type presented in this volume by Frédéric Docquier, then it is possible that this “brain circulation” might even have some elements favorable for growth. But given the complexity of analyzing this situation, the welfare implications will be even more ambiguous than in the case of a closed labor market. This example underlines the need for careful country-specific analysis of the drivers of college premiums and the extent of the supply response. 
Conclusions 
The race between education and technology—to borrow the title of Goldin and Katz’s (2007) analysis of U.S. education wage premiums—is a race that developingcountry education systems can ill afford to lose. The processes generating changes in the returns to higher education are complex, but it is essential that we understand and respond to them. If the broad trend toward increasing earnings differentials between highly educated people and other workers is allowed to continue unabated, income and social inequalities will deepen, translating inevitably into greater inequality of opportunities for children of the current generation of workers. It is crucial that we take steps to avoid creating these fundamental inequalities in countries that are enjoying rapid growth. With the right combination of policies to expand access to tertiary education efficiently and meritocratically, we have the opportunity to increase growth while at the same time improving equity. 
Notes 
1. This formulation too would miss some nuances. For example, assuming implicitly that each year of education at a given level has the same labor market returns assumes away any “sheepskin effects” that give a larger return for completing the final year of education at any level (see, for example, Jaeger and Page 1996). 2. An earlier paper by Edin and Holmlund (1995) finds a slight increase in relative returns to university education in the middle to late 1980s, but concurs in finding a sharp decline through the early 1980s. 
38 | FRANÇOIS BOURGUIGNON AND F. HALSEY ROGERS 
3. In the Indonesian case, making the extreme assumption that the rate of return to private education is at most double that of public education, a 10 percentage point increase in the share of the private sector would at most cause a 4 percentage point increase in the average rate of return instead of the ZQ points actually observed. 4. Figure 3 is not obviously consistent with the view that growing international mobility of labor has helped to drive the increase in returns to highly skilled workers. Careful analysis of this hypothesis would require further evidence, however. 5. Indeed, this may be impossible, to the extent that the returns are governed by the international price of skilled labor; see below for a brief discussion of the effects of migration. 6. For a discussion of quality assurance and other government roles in the tertiary sector, see 
World Bank (2002, chap. 4). 
References 
Alatas, Vivi, and François Bourguignon. 2005. “The Evolution of Income Distribution during Indonesia’s Fast Growth, 1980–96.” In The Microeconomics of Income Distribution Dynamics in East Asia and Latin America, ed. François Bourguignon, Francisco H. G. Ferreira, and Nora Lustig. Washington, DC: World Bank. Arabsheibani, G. Reza, Francisco Galrao Carneiro, and Andrew Henley. 2006. “Changes in Human Capital and Earnings Inequality: Recent Evidence from Brazil.” Journal of Development Studies 42 (5): 837–67. Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2005. “Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality: Re-Assessing the Revisionists.” NBER Working Paper 11627, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Baumol, William J. 1967. “Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy of Urban 
Crisis.” American Economic Review 57 (3): 415–26. Blom, Andreas, and Thomas Hansen. 2002. Economic Perspectives of Tertiary Education: The 
Case of Colombia. LCSHD Paper Series 75. Washington, DC: World Bank. Borland, Jeff, Peter Dawkins, David Johnson, and Ross Williams. 2000. “Returns to Investment in Higher Education.” Melbourne Economics of Higher Education Research Program Report No. 1, University of Melbourne. Bourguignon, François, Martin Fournier, and Marc Gurgand. 2005. “Distribution, Development, and Education in Taiwan, 1979–94.” In The Microeconomics of Income Distribution Dynamics in East Asia and Latin America, ed. François Bourguignon, Francisco H. G. Ferreira, and Nora Lustig. Washington, DC: World Bank. Brunello, Giorgio, Simona Comi, and Claudio Lucifora. 2000. “The College Wage Gap in 10 European Countries: Evidence from Two Cohorts.” Working Paper 85.2000, Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei, Milan. Card, David, and John E. DiNardo. 2002. “Skill-Biased Technological Change and Rising Wage Inequality: Some Problems and Puzzles.” Journal of Labor Economics 20 (4): 733–83. Cardoso, Ana Rute. 2004. “Jobs for Young University Graduates: Is It Worth Having a 
Degree?” IZA Discussion Paper 1311. Chase, Robert S. 1998. “Markets for Communist Human Capital: Returns to Education and Experience in the Czech Republic and Slovakia.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 51 (3): 401–23. de Ferranti, David, Guillermo E. Perry, Indermit Gill, J. Luis Guasch, William F. Maloney, Carolina Sanchez-Paramo, and Norbert Schady. 2003. Closing the Gap in Education and Technology. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
GLOBAL RETURNS TO HIGHER EDUCATION | 39 
de la Fuente, Angel, and Juan Francisco Jimeno. 2005. “The Private and Fiscal Returns to Schooling and the Effect of Public Policies on Private Incentives to Invest in Education: A General Framework and Some Results for the EU.” CESifo Working Paper 1392, CESifo GmbH, Munich. Edin, Per-Anders, and Bertl Holmlund. 1995. “The Swedish Wage Structure: The Rise and Fall of Wage Policy?” In Differences and Changes in Wage Structures, ed. Richard Barry Freeman and Lawrence F. Katz. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Fersterer, Josef, and Rudolf Winter-Ebmer. 2003. “Are Austrian Returns to Education Falling 
over Time?” Labour Economics 10 (1): 73–89. Fortin, Nicole M. 2006. “Higher-Education Policies and the College Wage Premium: Cross
State Evidence from the 1990s.” American Economic Review 96 (4): 959–87. Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. “The Race between Education and Technology: The Evolution of U.S. Educational Wage Differentials, 1890 to 2005.” NBER Working Paper 12984, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, and Klara Sabirianova Peter. 2005. “Returns to Schooling in Russia and Ukraine: A Semiparametric Approach to Cross-Country Comparative Analysis.” Journal of Comparative Economics 33 (2): 324–50. Gustavsson, Magnus. 2004. “Changes in Educational Wage Premiums in Sweden: 
1992–2001.” Department of Economics, Uppsala University. Hoegeland, Torbjorn, Tor Jakob Klette, and Kjell G. Salvanes. 1999. “Declining Returns to Education in Norway? Comparing Estimates across Cohorts, Sectors, and over Time.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 101 (4): 555–76. Jaeger, David A., and Marianne E. Page. 1996. “Degrees Matter: New Evidence on Sheepskin Effects in the Returns to Education.” Review of Economics and Statistics 78 (4): 733–40. Karkkainnen, Kura. 2006. “Emergence of Private Higher Education Funding within the 
OECD Area.” OECD, Center for Educational Research and Innovation, Paris. Legovini, Arianna, César Bouillón, and Nora Lustig. 2005. “Can Education Explain Changes in Income Inequality in Mexico?” In The Microeconomics of Income Distribution Dynamics in East Asia and Latin America, ed. François Bourguignon, Francisco H. G. Ferreira, and Nora Lustig. Washington, DC: World Bank. Li, Haizheng. 2003. “Economic Transition and Returns to Education in China.” Economics 
of Education Review 22 (3): 17–28. López-Acevedo, Gladys. 2001. “Evolution of Earnings and Rates of Returns to Education in Mexico.” Policy Research Working Paper 2691, World Bank, Poverty and Economic Management Unit, Washington, DC. Machin, Stephen, and Sandra McNally. 2007. “Tertiary Education Systems and Labour Markets.” Paper commissioned for the OECD, Thematic Review of Tertiary Education, January. Maglen, Leo. 1994. “Education Expansion and the Private Returns to a University Degree.” 
Economic Papers 13: 57–71. Munich, Daniel, Jan Svejnar, and Katherine Terrell. 2005. “Returns to Human Capital under the Communist Wage Grid and during the Transition to a Market Economy.” Review of Economics and Statistics 87 (1): 100–23. Palme, Marten O., and Robert E. Wright. 1998. “Changes in the Rate of Return to Education 
in Sweden: 1968–1991.” Applied Economics 30 (12): 1653–63. Patrinos, Harry Anthony, and Chris N. Sakellariou. 2004. “Economic Volatility and Returns 
to Education in Venezuela: 1992–2002.” Applied Economics 38 (17): 1991–2005. Tsakloglou, Panos, and Ioannis Cholezas. 2005. “Education and Inequality in Greece.” IZA 
Discussion Paper No. 1582. 
40 | FRANÇOIS BOURGUIGNON AND F. HALSEY ROGERS 
Vélez, Carlos Eduardo, José Leibovich, Adriana Kugler, César Bouillón, and Jairo Núñez. 2005. “The Reversal of Inequality Trends in Colombia, 1978–95: A Combination of Persistent and Fluctuating Forces.” In The Microeconomics of Income Distribution Dynamics in East Asia and Latin America, ed. François Bourguignon, Francisco H. G. Ferreira, and Nora Lustig. Washington, DC: World Bank. Vere, James P. 2005. “Education, Development, and Wage Inequality: The Case of Taiwan.” 
Economic Development and Cultural Change 53 (3): 711–35. World Bank. 2000. Higher Education in Developing Countries: Peril and Promise. Washington, 
DC: World Bank. 
. 2002. Constructing Knowledge Societies: New Challenges for Tertiary Education. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
In the past 40 years, East Asia has had among the most dynamic economies in the world, developing more rapidly and more consistently than any other region. In the early 1990s, the World Bank called it “the East Asian Success Story” (World Bank 1993). After suffering a severe economic crisis in the late 1990s, the region recovered quickly and resumed its impressive growth. 
There are many factors and explanations for the success, including policies giving priority to industries with comparative advantages, policies promoting exports, policies supporting a free or a managed market, relatively high saving and investment rates, a strong and purposeful state, and attitudes and work ethics supportive of development. Similarly important, or perhaps more important, the values and cultural traditions of many East Asian countries attach high priority to education, which has helped to develop East Asia’s human resources and enabled scientific and technological inventions to be absorbed and applied relatively easily. Confucianism is only one of the cultural traditions in the region that emphasize education in the development process. The ancient classics include sayings such as “To develop a nationstate, education should come first” and “A man without education cannot be a moral and knowledgeable man” (Min 2004). These long-standing values and beliefs have placed ever-increasing demands on education and had a significant impact on development. Confucianism has exerted an influence not only in China, Taiwan District, and Hong Kong District, but also in Japan, the Republic of Korea, and Singapore. Many studies have analyzed the strong relationship between economic development and education in East Asia (Adams 2002). As the World Bank (1991) comments, “One lesson from the past is that the economies—such as Japan and South Korea— which committed themselves to education and training made great strides in both human development and economic development.” 
Weifang Min is executive vice president and chair of the University Council as well as a professor in the economics of education at Peking University. 
Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics 2008, Regional  2008 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank 
41 
Keynote Address Higher Education Financing in East Asia: Policy Implications for China 
WEIFANG MIN 
42 | WEIFANG MIN 
Along with economic growth and the move from low-technology, labor-intensive production to more technologically sophisticated and higher-value production, East Asian economies experienced a broad expansion in education, starting with primary education and moving through to secondary education and even higher education. Well-educated populations, traditions of scholarship, and a deep respect for learning are part of virtually every East Asian economy. Since the 1990s, higher education has become even more central, forming an essential part of the knowledge economy and competitiveness for the future (Altbach 2004). 
Since financing is a central issue in higher education development, and the financial constraints on higher education are becoming greater in China as well as worldwide, this presentation seeks to analyze the financing of higher education in East Asia and to draw some policy implications for China. The rest of the paper is divided into two parts: the first one analyzes the financing of higher education in the East Asian region in general, while the second discusses what China might borrow from other East Asian economies. 
The Financing of Higher Education in East Asia 
East Asia is a highly diversified region, including the highly developed economy of Japan; the newly industrialized economies such as Korea, Taiwan District, Hong Kong District, and Singapore, followed by Malaysia and Thailand; developing economies such as the Philippines and Indonesia; and transitional economies such as China, Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia. Different countries have different historical influences. To a certain extent, Korea, Taiwan District, and Indonesia were influenced by Japan, either from colonial times or through trade relations. Hong Kong, Singapore, and Malaysia were influenced by the United Kingdom from the colonial period. The Philippines and some other East Asian economies were influenced by the United States either through the colonial period or through the American presence in the region following World War II. China, Vietnam, and Laos were influenced by the previous Soviet model in the period of a centrally planned economy. Cultural traditions in East Asia are also diversified. Some countries are more or less influenced by Confucian thinking, some countries have an Islamic cultural tradition, and still others have Western religious influences such as Catholicism or Christianity. 
Because of the diverse cultures, historical heritage, social systems, and levels of economic development, it is difficult to identify a uniform model for financing higher education that is suitable for all East Asian economies. Nevertheless, compared with some other regions in the world, East Asian economies, such as Japan, Korea, Taiwan District, the Philippines, and Indonesia, share some common patterns, as shown in table 1. In these countries, the proportion of students enrolled in higher education in the private sector is much larger, while the government expenditure on higher education is much lower, than in the European and North American countries. 
Even if government allocations for higher education are low in some East Asian economies, total expenditures on and enrollment in higher education are quite high, because individual families spend more on their children’s education (see table 2). 
HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCING IN EAST ASIA | 43 
TABLE 1. Higher Education Enrollment and Finance, by Region 
Enrollment Financing patterns 
Region Public Private Government Families 
Europe 100 percent Few High Low North America 70 percent 30 percent High High East Asiaa 20 percent 80 percent Low High 
Source: Kaneko (2006); OECD (2005). 
a. For East Asia, the OECD data set only has data for Japan and Korea. Data for Taiwan District are also available. 
TABLE 2. Total Higher Education Expenditure as a Percent of GDP, by Region, 2001 
Governmental Nongovernmental Regions expenditure expenditure Totala 
North America Canada 1.5 1.0 2.5 United States 0.9 1.8 2.7 
Europe United Kingdom 0.8 0.3 1.1 France 1.0 0.1 1.1 Germany 1.0 0.1 1.1 
East Asia Japan 0.5 0.6 1.1 Korea, Rep. of 0.4 2.3 2.7 
Source: OECD (2004). 
a. Expenditures per student include research expenditures. 
The government allocations for higher education are higher in Hong Kong District, Singapore, and Malaysia than in other East Asian economies, probably due to the colonial influence of the United Kingdom. The willingness of families to share the costs of higher education by paying tuition and fees is quite strong. This might be due to the belief that higher education is one of the best ways to achieve upward social mobility, especially intergenerational social mobility in which the family benefits by improving the economic and social status of the children. 
Cost sharing in many East Asian economies takes the form of enrollment in private institutions (Altbach 1999; Umakoshi 2004). Private education has thrived because the public sector has been unable to meet the demand. Although national universities in Japan, Korea, the Philippines, and some other East Asian economies have served as the core of the higher education system, the market-oriented private sector has led the expansion of enrollment in East Asia (Umakoshi 2004). In Korea in 2004, the government only spent about 0.4 percent of GDP on higher education (compared with 1.5 percent in Canada, 0.9 percent in the United States, and about 1.0 percent in European countries), but the gross enrollment rate was above 80 percent (see figure 1). In China private institutions grew quite rapidly after the country 
44 | WEIFANG MIN 
FIGURE 1 Private Education’s Share of Total Enrollment in Higher Education Institutions in Select East Asian Economies 
South Korea 
Japan 
Philippines y rtnuoC80.6 
77 
66.4 
Indonesia 
65.2 
Taiwan District 
61.5 
Malaysia 
30 
China 
10 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 
80Percentage 
Source: Author’s calculations, based on data synthesized from the web sites of World Bank, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, UNESCO, and OECD, 2000–06. 
shifted from a centrally planned economy to a dynamic market economy and officially adopted the law to promote min-ban (private) education in December 2002 (National People’s Congress of China 2002). 
When East Asian economies are divided into four groups by income level, the level of government spending for education in every case is lower than the world average, even for the high-income economies, indicating that individual families bear the bulk of higher education costs, as shown in figure 2. The upper-middle-income group in the region only has one economy—Malaysia—with a high level of public spending on education. 
In looking at three major indicators of public finance for higher education (public expenditure as a percentage of GDP, enrollment rate, and proportion of students in the private sector), the rates of China are significantly lower than those of Japan, Korea, or the Philippines, as demonstrated in figure 3. 
Although China’s total spending on education as a percentage of GDP is lower than both the world and regional averages, its spending on higher education as a percentage of GDP (0.6 percent in 2005) is relatively higher than that of some other East Asian economies, such as Japan (0.5 percent in 2004) and Korea (0.4 percent in 2004). China spends a relatively larger share on higher education than Japan, Korea, and the Philippines, especially since 1999, when the Chinese government decided to spend more on higher education, as shown in figure 4. 
The trends in public expenditure per student on higher education as a percent of GDP per capita show that China spends a much higher share per student than the other three East Asian economies. This indicates that (a) China’s GDP per capita is lower than that of the other three economies, and that (b) China’s use of resources is relatively inefficient because of the legacy of the centrally planned system, and the fact that current reforms are still under way. However, spending per student declined 
90 
FIGURE 2 Higher Education Finance in East Asia, by Level of Income 
100 
908070 
t necrePSource: Author’s calculations based on data synthesized from the web sites of the World Bank, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, UNESCO, and OECD, 2000–06. 
908070 
t necreP605040 3020100High income country 605040 3020100Upper middle 
Lower middle 
Low income 
China income country 
income country 
country 
Public expenditure on education as % of GDP Public expenditure on education as % of total government expenditure Public educational expenditure in tertiary as % of total educational expenditure Tertiary public educational expenditure per pupil as a percentage of GDP per capita 
FIGURE 3 Higher Education Finance in Select East Asian Countries 
100 
Japan Korea Philippines China 
Public expenditure on education as % of GDP Public expenditure on education as % of total government expenditure Public educational expenditure in tertiary as % of total educational expenditure Tertiary public educational expenditure per pupil as a percentage of GDP per capita Enrollment rate in tertiary education Tertiary education enrollment in private college as % of total enrollment 
Source: Author’s calculations based on data synthesized from the web sites of the World Bank, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, UNESCO, and OECD, 2000–06. 
45 
46 | WEIFANG MIN 
FIGURE 4 Higher Education Expenditure as a Percent of Total Education Spending in Select East Asian Countries, 1998–2004 
3025 
China 20 egatnecreP15Source: Author’s calculations based on data synthesized from the web sites of the World Bank, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, UNESCO, and OECD, 2000–06. 
FIGURE 5 Public Expenditure per Student on Higher Education as a Percent of GDP per Capita in Select East Asian Countries, 1998–2004 
Source: Author’s calculations based on data synthesized from the web sites of the World Bank, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, UNESCO, and OECD, 2000–06. 
Japan 
Philippines 
10Korea 
501998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 
120 
100 
80 egatnecreP60China 4020 
Japan 
Philippines Korea 01998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 
HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCING IN EAST ASIA | 47 
sharply beginning in 1999, when the dramatic expansion of Chinese higher education took place. This probably occurred as a result of (a) improvements in the efficiency of resource use as the educational reforms deepened and enrollment expanded and (b) the increase in China’s GDP per capita, which lowered expenditure per student as a share of GDP, as shown in figure 5. 
In short, financing in East Asia has many unique features. As one part of East Asia, China shares common traditions and features with other East Asian economies. However, China is still transitioning from a centrally planned to a market economy. What experiences and lessons should China borrow from other East Asian economies in financing higher education? This is the subject of the following section. 
What China Might Borrow from Other East Asian Economies in Financing Higher Education 
Similar to some of the other East Asian economies, along with rapid economic growth, the massive expansion of education in China moved quickly from primary to secondary and then to higher education, especially since the late 1990s. However, since China is a transitional economy, to understand current economic and social development in relation to higher education reform and development, one has to understand the economic transition that China is experiencing. All of the major changes in Chinese higher education, including curriculum and teaching, governance, and financing, are closely related to economic reform and development. On the one hand, the economic transition is creating demand for well-educated manpower and raising the level of individual income, which, in turn, is creating more demand for higher education. On the other hand, universities and colleges are producing highlevel, well-educated, specialized human resources, generating the knowledge urgently needed by the new economy, and preparing people to participate in the economic and social changes. Universities thus have a vital role to play in the country’s social and economic transition and development. China’s economic transition is relatively successful, averaging annual GDP growth rates above 9 percent for the past 28 years, as shown in figure 6. 
According to Wang Mengkui of the Development Research Center of the State Council of China (Wang 2006) and some Peking University economists such as Wen Hai (Wen 2006), the Chinese economy will continue to grow relatively quickly for the next 20 years. By 2010, the estimated GDP of China will be close to Y 30 trillion. First, China will continue to have a competitive advantage because of its large supply of low-cost labor. Currently, about 60 percent of labor is still in the rural areas. Along with the modernization of agriculture and increased agricultural productivity, the proportion of labor in farming will be reduced to 20 percent or below, which means that, in the next 20 years, 500 million people will be liberated from farming the land. They will join the labor force in the manufacturing and service sectors. Second, China potentially has a huge domestic market, and the purchasing power of its population of 1.3 billion people will keep the economy growing. Foreign 
48 | WEIFANG MIN 
FIGURE 6 GDP in China, 1978–2005 100 million yuan 
200,000 
183,085 
150,000 
n auyn oillim0 01100,000 
99,215 
60,794 
50,000 
0 
1978197919801981198219831984198519861987198819891990199119921993199419951996199719981999200020012002200320042005 
Source: State Statistics Bureau of China (various years). 
trade and investment are driving China’s current economic growth, but development of the domestic market will constitute an even more powerful force. Third, the reform will deepen during the next 20 years, and the structural and systemic changes will further liberate China’s productive forces and raise productivity. At present, the reform of property rights has not been completed, which results in a significant loss of productivity. The potential for growth as a result of property reform is huge. Fourth, the external environment for China’s growth is relatively good. Entering the World Trade Organization (WTO) allows China to make better use of the global market and global resources through mutually beneficial arrangements for economic development. 
Rapid economic development and deepened reform have dramatically changed how human resources are mobilized, allocated, and used in China, which, in turn, has had a significant impact on the human resource model and operational mechanism for China’s higher education system (Min 2002). Driven by the human resource needs of the labor market and higher family income, demand for higher education is soaring, leading to a rapid expansion in enrollment. Table 3 shows the annual admissions of new students, while figure 7 shows the total enrollment of regular, fulltime students in higher education. 
However, although the government has raised the level of spending on higher education, as shown in figure 8, the increase in state appropriations has not kept pace with the expansion in enrollment, resulting in increasing financial constraints for universities and colleges. As shown in table 4, government funding per student has been declining in recent years, both in total allocations per student and in nonsalary allocations for teaching and learning materials per student. The total allocation per 
HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCING IN EAST ASIA | 49 
TABLE 3. Number of Annual Admissions of New Students to Higher Education Institutions in China, 1998–2006 
Year Annual new intakes 
1998 1,000,000 1999 1,600,000 2000 2,200,000 2001 2,680,000 2002 3,200,000 2003 3,820,000 2004 4,300,000 2005 5,080,000 2006 5,400,000 
Source: Ministry of Education, PRC (various years, 1998–2006). 
FIGURE 7 Regular Full-time Enrollment in Higher Education in China, 1978–2005 numbers (10,000) 
2,000 
1,561.78 1,500 ) 000,01(s rebmuN1,000 
556.09 500 
0 
1978198019851986 
198719881989 
199019911992 
1993199419951996199719981999200020012002200320042005 
Source: State Statistics Bureau of China (various years). 
student decreased from Y 6,178 in 2002 to Y 5,552 in 2004. It further decreased to Y 5,376 in 2005 (Chen 2007). 
Other indicators of quality have also been declining, such as student-teacher ratios, classroom space per student, laboratory space per student, library space and books per student, and living facilities per student. On the one hand, the current financial situation of Chinese higher education institutions is very tight; on the other 
50 | WEIFANG MIN 
FIGURE 8 Government Appropriations for Higher Education in China, 1998–2005 100 million yuan 
2,500 
2,000 
n auyn oillim0 011,500 1,000 
0 
1998 
TABLE 4. Budgeted Funding per Student in China, 2002–04 yuan 
Year 2002 2003 2004 
Total funding per student 6,178 5,773 5,552 Nonsalary funding per student 2,453 2,352 2,298 
Source: Ministry of Education, PRC (2005). 
2,000 
1,683 
1,447 
1,145 
904 
704 545 500 
1999 
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
Source: Ministry of Education, PRC (various years, 1998–2005). 
hand, the social demands for higher education are strong and growing, as shown in table 5. These estimates were conducted in 2004. By 2006, total enrollment in higher education had already reached 25 million students, and it is expected to reach 30 million by 2010. Thus a systematic approach to improving higher education finance has to be developed. 
Possible Strategies to Tackle the Financial Constraints in Higher Education 
China has been learning from the experiences of other East Asian economies with regard to economic development and has much to learn about the financing of higher education as well. 
One approach is to raise total state spending on education to the average level of East Asian economies. Recently, a national policy decision has been made to increase 
HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCING IN EAST ASIA | 51 
TABLE 5. Estimated Enrollment in Higher Education in China, 2010 and 2020 enrollment in millions; rate in percent 
2010 2020 
Estimated growth in enrollment Number Enrollment Number Enrollment from base year (2004) enrolled rate enrolled rate 
Low (3 percent) 23.88 20.6 32.09 38.3 Middle (5 percent) 26.80 23.1 43.66 52.1 High (8 percent) 31.74 27.4 68.52 81.8 Very high (10 percent) 35.43 30.6 91.90 109.7 
Source: Zhang (2005). 
Note: The population between the ages of 18 to 22 is estimated to be 115.82 million for 2010 and 83.75 million for 2020. 
government allocation to education from less than 3 percent to 4 percent of GDP by 2010. Considering the rapid growth of GDP, the current government allocation to education will almost double. 
China’s system of higher education still has many inefficiencies and great opportunities to improve the use and allocation of resources. This could be achieved by giving universities and colleges more autonomy in financial management. Universities and colleges could improve their financial situation by improving the efficiency and effectiveness of resource use and cutting costs. During the centrally planned period, universities and colleges were totally reliant on state appropriations and were not allowed to mobilize resources from other sources. Now that the economic transition is well under way, wealth is being accumulated in different sectors of society, and it is possible to obtain funding from sources other than the government. Better resource mobilization strategies and more autonomy would help institutions to generate revenue by themselves. This could be done by providing training and other paid services for industries, obtaining commissioned research contracts, and pursuing fundraising activities. Recently, public universities and colleges were allowed to set up foundations to mobilize financial support from private donations, and this has constituted a major breakthrough. 
Encouraging private universities and colleges to develop a dual financial system and allowing both public and private higher education are showing promise. Given the huge unmet demand and considering that the Chinese people attach high priority to the pursuit of higher education opportunities, this is a must. Some policy actions have already been taken. In 1993 the State Education Commission of China issued a document allowing the creation of min-ban (private) higher education institutions (State Education Commission of China 1993). In 2002 the National People’s Congress of China adopted a law to promote private higher education (National People’s Congress of China 2002). 
The unmet demand for higher education is still growing, the capacity of the public sector is limited, and the population is increasingly able to pay a portion of the cost of higher education; thus the expansion of private higher education is feasible. According to some social survey results, the first purpose of Y 16 trillion 
52 | WEIFANG MIN 
of individual family savings is for children’s education (State Statistics Bureau of China 2006). Moreover, the gross enrollment rate in higher education is only 22 percent, leaving 78 percent of China’s college-age population not attending college. As shown in figure 1, the private sector’s share of higher education is still very small in China compared with some other East Asian economies, as Umakoshi (2004) correctly points out: “The private sectors in Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, and the Philippines accommodate over three-quarters of the higher education population, which is unusual in any other area of the world.” Along with development of the new market economy, China should develop a more comprehensive policy framework and a more solid legal infrastructure for the development and regulation of private universities and colleges, as other East Asian economies have done. 
Cost sharing in higher education has been widely practiced in East Asian eco nomies as well as in other parts of the world (Johnstone 2004, 2006; López-Segrera, Sanyal, and Tres 2006), such as in the United States. Following the lead of other East Asia economies, in 1989 China started to charge tuition and fees in universities and colleges and to offer financial aid for students from needy families. The government has regulated universities and colleges to keep an appropriate level of tuition. At the same time, various types of financial aid for students from needy families, such as scholarships, grants-in-aid, government-subsidized student loans, and work-study programs, have been implemented. As individual incomes grow, China should consider formulating and implementing cost-sharing policies: the beneficiaries of higher education who are able to pay should shoulder a reasonable proportion of the costs based on a unit cost analysis. 
Finally, China needs to tackle equity issues in financing higher education. Equity has been a major issue in East Asia as well as in other parts of the world. Along with the social changes and rapid economic growth in the transitional process, some serious equity issues are evident in China, including inequality of income distribution and regional disparities. These problems are also reflected in the higher education sector. Figure 9 shows that China has more serious problems of educational inequality than some other East Asian economies, such as Japan and Korea, as indicated by Gini coefficients. 
Further analysis of access to higher education by income group shows that children from higher-income families tend to enroll in more prestigious universities and to receive higher-quality education and better professional opportunities, as shown in figure 10. Although students from families with lower socioeconomic backgrounds have more access to education than before, the students from families with higher socioeconomic status are better able to attend higher-quality, prestigious universities because they generally score higher on national college entrance examinations. Bettereducated parents with higher family incomes are better able to develop their children’s scholastic aptitude and ability by providing better advice and additional assistance regarding their children’s education. 
Empirical analysis of income inequality of different social groups by education level shows that the lower the level of educational attainment, the higher the level of 
HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCING IN EAST ASIA | 53 
FIGURE 9 Education Gini Coefficient in Select Countries, 1960–2000 
0.6 
0.5 
0.3 
0.20 
Source: Thomas, Wang, and Fan (2001). 
80 6040200Korea 0.4 
China 
Japan 
USA 0.1 
1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 
FIGURE 10 Student Enrollment in Different Types of Higher Education Institutions in China, by Family Background 
100 
90 
s tnedutsf oe gatnecreP70503010Low income Lower-middle Middle 
Income quintiles 
Source: Li (2006). 
Higher-middle High income 
Low quality universities Middle quality universities 
Elite universities 
54 | WEIFANG MIN 
FIGURE 11 Gini Coefficients in China, by Level of Education 
0.500 
0.400 
0.300 
0.2000 
income inequality, as shown in figure 11. Education could play an important role in improving social equity by improving income distribution. 
It has been argued that a harmonious society has to be a more equitable society and that equity in education is the foundation of social equity. Higher education could play an important role in promoting intergenerational upward social mobility for low-income social groups (Guo and Min 2006, 2007). Thus, to tackle the issue of equity, the government significantly increased the amount of financial aid available to students from low-income families, from less than Y 10 billion in 2006 to Y 30.8 billion in 2008. A new student financial aid program will be implemented within three years, and the total amount available for helping students from lowincome families will exceed Y 50 billion (Zhao 2007). 
Another major equity issue in Chinese higher education is the striking regional disparities. The level of economic development between the east coast region and the inland, especially the western region has been widening in the past 28 years, leading to significant disparities in the financing of higher education, as shown in table 6. 
The new policy direction of the Chinese state is to achieve more even development of the country, construct a harmonious society, and eliminate regional disparities in education. To further these ends, China should borrow from the experience of some other East Asian economies and increase intergovernmental transfers, meaning more educational appropriations from the central government to the poor provinces. This has begun, and China has set up special financial aid programs for students from low-income families in the underdeveloped regions. In addition, China requires universities from the better-developed regions to partner with universities in the underdeveloped areas to provide educational support. 
0.415 
0.388 
0.384 
0.372 
0.346 
0.341 
0.291 
0.100 
Primary 
Junior 
Senior 
Technical 
Junior 
Under
Graduate high 
high 
secondary 
college 
graduate 
Source: Household survey conducted by State Statistics Bureau of China and Peking University, 2006. 
HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCING IN EAST ASIA | 55 
TABLE 6. Budgeted Funding per Student in China, by Region, in 2004 yuan 
Region Total Nonsalary 
Shanghai 9,116 4,490 Tianjin 9,022 3,886 Guangdong 8,581 3,573 Hubei 2,459 841 Hunan 2,581 857 Sichuan 1,946 870 
Source: Ministry of Education, PRC (various years, 2005). 
In short, China shares many traditions and features with some of the other East Asian economies. China is seeking to learn from the experiences and lessons of some and to avoid the problems of others. China is paying attention to the “East Asian Success Story.” 
References 
Adams, Don. 2002. Education and National Development: Priorities, Policies, and Planning; Education in Developing Asia. Vol. 1. Hong Kong: Asian Development Bank and the Comparative Education Research Center, University of Hong Kong. Altbach, Philip. 2004. “The Past and Future of Asian Universities: Twenty-First Century Challenges.” In Asian Universities: Historical Perspectives and Contemporary Challenges, ed. Philip Altbach and Toru Umakoshi. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. Altbach, Philip G., ed. 1999. Private Prometheus: Private Higher Education and Development 
in the 21st Century. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. Chen, Weiguang. 2007. China Higher Education Financing and Management. Beijing: Ministry 
of Education, PRC, Department of Finance. Guo, Congbin, and Weifang Min. 2006. “The Impact of Family Economic and Cultural Capital on Children’s Educational Opportunities.” Journal of Higher Education Research [Wuhan, China] 11 (141): 24–31. ———. 2007. “The Intergenerational Income Mobility of Chinese Urban Residents.” Educa
tion Research [Beijing, China] 5 (328): 3–14. Johnstone, D. Bruce. 2004. “The Economics and Politics of Cost-Sharing in Higher Education: 
Comparative Perspectives.” Economics of Education Review 23 (4): 403–10. ———. 2006. Financing Higher Education: Cost-Sharing in International Perspectives. Boston College, Center for International Higher Education, International Comparative Higher Education Finance and Accessibility Project, and Sense Publishers, the Netherlands. Kaneko, Motohisa. 2006. “Financial Issues in East Asian Model for Higher Education Development.” Paper presented at the China-Japan Joint Conference on Higher Education Finance, September 16–17, Peking University, Beijing. Li, Wenli. 2006. “Family Background, Financial Constraints, and Higher Education Attendance.” Paper presented at the International Conference on the Economics of Education: Major Contributions and Future Directions, Dijon, June 20–23. 
56 | WEIFANG MIN 
López-Segrera, Francisco, Bikas Sanyal, and Joaquim Tres. 2006. “Global Tendencies and Perspectives on Higher Education in Today’s World.” In Higher Education in the World 2006: The Financing of Universities. A Global University Network for Innovation (GUNI) report. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. Min, Weifang. 2002. Research on the Higher Education Operation Mechanism in the Market 
Economy. Beijing: People’s Education Press, June. ———. 2004. “The Legacy of the Past and the Context of the Future.” In Asian Universities: Historical Perspectives and Contemporary Challenges, ed. Philip Altbach and Toru Umakoshi. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. Ministry of Education, PRC (People’s Republic of China. Various years, 1998–2005. China 
Education Finance Statistics Yearbook. Beijing. National People’s Congress of China. 2002. Law for Promoting Min-Ban (Private) Education 
of China. Beijing: National People’s Congress of China. OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2004. Education at a 
Glance: OECD Indicators, 2004. Paris: OECD. ———. 2005. Education at a Glance: OECD Indicators, 2005. Paris: OECD. State Education Commission of China. 1993. Regulations for the Establishment of Min-Ban 
(Private) Higher Education Institutions. Beijing: State Education Commission of China. State Statistics Bureau of China. 2006. China Statistics Year Book 1996. Beijing: State Statistics 
Bureau of China. ———. Various years, 1998–2006. China Education Statistics Yearbook. Beijing: Ministry of 
Education, China. Thomas, V., Y. Wang, and X. Fan. 2001. “Measuring Education Inequality: Gini Coefficients of Education.” Policy Research Working Paper 2525, World Bank, Washington, DC, January. Umakoshi, Toru. 2004. “Private Higher Education in Asia: Traditions and Development.” In Asian Universities: Historical Perspectives and Contemporary Challenges, ed. Philip Altbach and Toru Umakoshi. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. Wang, Mengkui. 2006. The Prospect of the Chinese Economic Development. Beijing: State 
Council of China, Development Research Center. Wen, Hai. 2006. “Prospects of the Future Trends of China’s Economic Development.” A speech given at the Shenzhen Business School of Peking University, Shenzhen, June 23. World Bank. 1991. World Development Report 1991: The Challenge of Development. New 
York: Oxford University Press for the World Bank. ———. 1993. World Development Report 1993: Investing in Health. New York: Oxford 
University Press for the World Bank. Zhang, Li. 2005. Speech given at Peking University on December 28, 2005, Beijing, China. Zhao, Lu. 2007. China’s Financial Policy for Supporting Post-Compulsory Education. Beijing: 
Ministry of Finance, PRC, Department of Education, Sciences, and Culture. 
Higher Education and Migration: Brain Drain and Sharing Skills in the Region 
Much attention has been paid to how the emigration of skilled workers affects the returns to educational investments in low-income countries. Data recently have been put together that provide a global picture of the extent to which persons receiving their tertiary education in low-income countries end up residing in developed countries and the proportion of tertiary-educated persons from a country who are living abroad (Beine, Docquier, and Rapoport 2006). The overall rate of either measure is high, suggesting that education policies in low-income countries need to be attentive to skilled emigration, either of persons with tertiary schooling or those seeking to acquire it. These “brain drain” statistics, however, ignore the facts that many students born and residing in low-income (and high-income) countries acquired their tertiary schooling outside the country and that high-income countries are a major source of tertiary training for students from low-income countries. 
The total number of international students in the world is large. The United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) reports that in 2005 more than 2 million students were enrolled in tertiary institutions as foreign (nonresident) students; 52.4 percent of these were from Asian countries, just slightly below Asia’s share of the world population (56.5 percent). Which countries are providing schooling to the world? Five countries—the United States, United Kingdom, Australia, Japan, and Germany—account for almost 80 percent of the stock of foreign students. This group of five countries also constitutes the principal destination for students from Asia, accounting for 76.3 percent of total Asian enrollment. As seen in figure 1, the United States is by far the major destination for Asian students, accounting for almost a third of the total population of Asian students acquiring tertiary education abroad. 
Mark R. Rosenzweig is the Frank Altschul Professor of International Economics and director of the Economic Growth Center at Yale University. He is grateful to two referees for helpful comments. 
Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics 2008, Regional  2008 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank 
59 
Higher Education and International Migration in Asia: Brain Circulation 
MARK R. ROSENZWEIG 
60 | MARK R. ROSENZWEIG 
FIGURE 1 Percentage of All Asian Students Studying Abroad in Tertiary Schools in Top Five Receiving Countries, 2004 Percent Studying Abroad 
35 
302520151050United States United Kingdom Australia Japan Germany 
Source: UNESCO data. 
There is no information on the total number of tertiary-educated residents of lowincome countries who acquired their higher education abroad. Thus it is not known to what extent the brain drain statistics overestimate the net loss of human capital. Nor has there been, up to now, reliable information on the proportion of foreign students who do not return to their home country. The impact of externally obtained higher education on the origin countries of foreign students can be large, however. Spilimbergo (2007) examines the educational background of the leaders of 113 countries in 1990 and finds that 57 percent of them were educated abroad, 22 percent in just three countries—the United States, the United Kingdom, and France. Three of the leaders of the 13 Asian countries in his database were educated outside their home country, two in the United States. 
An older theoretical literature emphasizes the loss of human capital to low-income countries and thus the potentially negative effects of the emigration of skilled workers on economic development (for example, Bhagwati and Hamada 1974). An influential newer literature (Beine, Docquier, and Rapoport 2001, 2008; Mountford 1997; Stark, Helmenstein, and Prskawetz 1998) suggests, however, that the emigration of skilled workers can increase the educational investments of sending countries. The idea is that the prospects of emigrating to a country where skills are rewarded more generously can lead not only to more investment in skills in the home country but also to a more highly educated domestic population. The expected gains to schooling investments are thus a weighted average of the remuneration of the persons schooled in the home country and in a potential destination country, where the weights are based on the probability of emigrating. 
HIGHER EDUCATION AND INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION IN ASIA | 61 
There are two problems with the “brain gain” framework. First, for most countries, the probability that a domestically educated tertiary-educated person can permanently emigrate to a high-income country is very small, so the effect of the “risk” of emigrating on the acquisition of domestic schooling is not large. Second, the literature ignores the endogeneity of the emigration probability at the individual level. In particular, it ignores the fact that the choice of location of tertiary education significantly affects the probability that a person can emigrate permanently. Potentially, a student receiving his or her education in a high-income country has advantages in that country’s marriage market1 and labor market compared with a person who seeks a mate or a job in a high-income country while residing in a lowincome country. That is, obtaining tertiary schooling abroad is an important route to emigration. Indeed, unlike for many visas, there are no country ceilings or kinship requirements for student visas. And, as we show in this paper, the probability that a foreign-trained student will remain in the host country (the United States) is on the order of 20 percent, far higher than the overall emigration probability for a domestically schooled student. 
Clearly higher education policy in low-income countries must be attentive not only to emigration issues but also to the alternative of outsourcing higher education abroad. Deciding on higher education policies in a poor country thus requires answering a number of questions. Is educational outsourcing, and thus the exploitation of higher education subsidies in high-income countries, a cost-effective alternative to expensive domestic investments in higher education?2 Indeed, do investments in higher education at home even reduce the flow of students who seek schooling abroad? Does foreign schooling reflect a lack of investments in domestic schooling or just the low rewards to schooling compared with the high-income countries where schooling is sought? How large is the permanent loss of internationally trained students? These are the questions considered in this paper. 
In the first section, a simple model of the international pricing of skills and choice of schooling location is set out to clarify issues and motivate the subsequent empirical analysis. There are four key implications of the model in which students are seeking to maximize the gains from emigration: (a) More schooled persons always gain more from emigration to a country that provides higher rewards for skills. Students are more likely to choose schooling abroad (b) the larger the gap in the rewards to skills between the home country and the host country, (c) the lower the quality of domestic schools, and (d) the higher the incomes in the domestic economy. The second section is concerned with measuring the global rewards for skills—the price of skills across countries. Estimates are presented of skill prices for 19 Asian countries, showing the enormous cross-country disparities in rewards for skills. In the next two sections estimates are presented of the determinants, respectively, of the distribution of the stock of foreign students who obtain their schooling in the United States, the dominant host country for foreign students, and the determinants of the students’ choice of host country in which to obtain their schooling. The fifth section is concerned with measuring the stay rates of foreign students and their determinants; it also presents the estimated stay rates for foreign students in the United States and the determinants of their return rates across sending countries. 
62 | MARK R. ROSENZWEIG 
The main empirical findings are as follows: 
1. The pattern of student flows across countries is consistent with the hypothesis that students acquire schooling abroad in order to obtain jobs in the host country: there are larger per capita numbers of foreign students in the United States from lower skill-price countries than from high skill-price countries, and host countries with higher skill prices attract the most foreign students, controlling for the quality and quantity of tertiary institutions in the sending and host countries. 
2. Increasing the number of colleges and universities in a sending country with a low skill price, given the quality of its higher education institutions, increases, not decreases, the number of students who seek (graduate-level) education abroad, as it increases the number of persons with higher gains from emigrating. 
3. Improving the quality of domestic tertiary institutions decreases student outflows. 
4. Higher-income students gain the most from foreign schooling: among countries with similar rewards to skills, those that are richer and closer to the host country send more students abroad for schooling, for a given quantity and quality of domestic education. 
5. Asian students are more likely to migrate to the United States for schooling, net 
of differences in skill price and educational quality and quantity. 
6. The proportion of foreign students who remain in the United States as permanent immigrants is approximately 20 percent, but the proportion of students from Asian countries who do so is only about 14 percent. Those students from Asia who do immigrate are highly schooled compared to students from other regions and tend to be disproportionately computer scientists, engineers, and natural scientists. There are few professionals among any of the immigrating foreign students. 
7. Return rates of foreign students from the United States are higher for countries with higher skill prices, with Asian students more likely to return net of skill-price effects. However, on net, lower skill-price countries, for a given population size, have larger domestic stocks of foreign-trained persons compared with high skillprice countries. Thus, although there is a tax in the form of the loss of a fraction of highly skilled persons to host countries that supply tertiary schooling, the tax is highest for low skill-price countries, and such countries disproportionately accrue a net brain gain from the outsourcing of tertiary education. 
Theoretical Framework 
To understand how the economic returns to acquiring schooling in a foreign country are related to migration gains and to the returns to and quality of domestic schooling, it is useful to set out a simple theoretical framework. The simplest model is one with a single type of skill. The earnings or wage, Wij, of an individual i in country j 
HIGHER EDUCATION AND INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION IN ASIA | 63 
is then the product of the country-specific price of skill j—the skill price—and the number of skill units, xij, possessed by i: 
(1) Wij jxij. 
Skill units are produced in school. The relationship between skill units and schooling, S, is given by 
(2) xij ije S, 
where ij is the baseline skill of a worker and is a parameter that translates years of schooling into skill units—a higher implies that a year of schooling produces more skill units, so naturally represents the quality of schooling. Within a country, if is high, school quality (the domestic “return” to schooling) is high, and higher-S individuals will earn proportionally more than lower-S individuals compared with a country in which is low. Across countries, however, differences in earnings for a person with the same number of years of schooling S also will reflect differences in the price paid for a unit of skill. As we will see, prices of skill, j, differ substantially more across countries than do the returns to domestic schooling, . The gains from out-migration are dominated by cross-country differences in skill prices. 
Consider the choice of schooling location for a student i residing in country j. Schooling taken abroad has two potential benefits. First, it may enhance the prospects for receiving a job abroad, at a higher skill price. Second, schools abroad may be of higher quality, so the foreign-trained student will earn more at home than if she acquires the schooling domestically. If pA is the probability of getting a job in the destination country, u, where schooling is taken and reflects the quality of schools there, then the expected wage if one unit of schooling is taken abroad is given by 
(3) E(Wij)A pA ue (1 pA) je , 
where (0 1) measures the extent to which schooling acquired abroad is of less value in the home country than in the destination country.3 
If the net direct cost of acquiring schooling outside the country—for example, travel costs, foreign language training, and the extra tuition—is CA, then the expected gain from schooling broad, GA, is 
(4) GijA pA ue j[(1 pA)e e ] CijA. 
Equation 4 assumes that the probability of obtaining a permanent job abroad if schooling is acquired domestically is nil. What is necessary for the analysis is that pA must be greater than the probability of getting a job without foreign schooling. In the U.S. case, the probability for a randomly selected individual depends on the probability that the person has an immediate relative abroad (an infinitesimal probability) or wins the diversity visa lottery. For a person in an eligible country, that probability is less than 0.5 percent.4 Moreover, for an analysis of schooling choice in Asia, it is notable that six of the 16 countries not eligible for the lottery visa are in Asia (China, India, Pakistan, the Philippines, Republic of Korea, and Vietnam).5 For persons in 
64 | MARK R. ROSENZWEIG 
these countries, there is even less opportunity to emigrate. As we will see, however, the probability that a foreign student in the United States will obtain a permanent visa is as high as 20 percent. 
We assume that a student will go abroad for schooling if equation 4 is positive and will seek a destination among multiple destinations in which the net gain is highest. Thus the fraction of students who migrate from country j to acquire schooling abroad will be a function of the determinants of the average gain from doing so; that is, 
(5) mj g(GjA) g(pA, u, j,Cj A, , , ). 
There are a number of testable implications from the model. First, if direct costs of acquiring schooling are high, then parental resources will matter, or, at the country level, richer countries will have more students studying abroad, everything else remaining the same. In contrast, however, in origin countries with high skill prices but with the same level of income, the gains from schooling abroad are likely to be smaller. The effect on the gain and thus the magnitude of student out-migration from a rise in the domestic skill price is given by equation 6: 
(6) GA/ j (1 pA)e e . 
As can be seen, the relationship between the foreign-schooling gain and the home skill price is more likely to be negative the higher is the probability PA of obtaining a foreign job via schooling abroad and the lower is the premium for foreign schooling at home ( low). Indeed, if domestic and foreign schooling yield approximately the same return in the home country and students seek (higher-paying) jobs abroad, the higher skill-price countries will always have fewer students abroad: 
(7) GA/ j pAe 0 if . 
Note that if acquiring schooling in a foreign country with a higher skill price does not increase the employment prospects there (PA 0), the only reasons for acquiring schooling abroad are the lower costs or higher quality of foreign schools. If the latter is true ( ), then countries with high skill prices (and low-quality schools) will send more students abroad. The sign of the relationship between the number of students from a country studying abroad and its skill price thus reveals whether studying abroad is motivated, in part, by the desire to migrate permanently. Moreover, if job prospects abroad are a motive for foreign schooling, it will also be true that an increase in the price of skill in a destination country will increase the expected gain from acquiring schooling in that country and lead to more foreign students studying there. 
(8) GA/ u pAe 0. 
Increasing the quality of domestic schooling will, however, reduce the net gain from acquiring schooling abroad, whether or not schooling abroad enhances employment at the destination, and thus will reduce the outflow of students: 
(9) GA/ je 0. 
HIGHER EDUCATION AND INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION IN ASIA | 65 
Finally, an increase in the quality of foreign schools will increase the gain from obtaining foreign schooling and thus attract more students from abroad, but that gain will be smaller, the smaller the probability of getting a foreign job and the smaller the domestic gain from foreign schooling, . 
(10) GA/ pA ue j [(1 pA)e 0. 
Estimating World Skill Prices 
Using the skill-price framework to examine the determinants of the flow of students across countries requires information on the wages of workers with the same skills across all countries of the world. With such data, it is relatively straightforward to identify skill prices. In particular, substituting equation 2 into equation 1 and taking logs yields the familiar log-linear wage equation: 
(11) Ln(Wij) Ln j jSij Ln ij. 
In this case, each country has its own intercept and perhaps a different return to domestic schooling.6 The country-specific intercepts in equation 11 are the countryspecific skill prices. 
All prior empirical analyses of international migration have used GDP per capita or, in rare cases, GDP per worker as the relevant “wage” affecting migration gains. However, as the model makes clear, what matters is how cross-country earnings differ for a worker of given skill, which is the skill price. Per capita GDP varies across countries due to differences in age composition, labor force participation rates, and the average level of skill of the workforce, all of which are irrelevant from the perspective of a worker deciding whether and where to migrate (or acquire schooling). 
The principal barrier to obtaining skill prices is the absence of comparable data on the earnings of workers by skill for many countries of the world. Two sources of data are used here. The first is the predecessor survey to the New Immigrant Survey, the New Immigrant Survey Pilot (NIS-P), which provides the home-country earnings for a sample of new legal immigrants admitted to legal permanent residence in the United States during the months of July and August 1996. The sample size for adult immigrants is 1,032. Details on the survey are given in Jasso and others (2000). Of the sampled immigrants, 332, representing 54 countries, had worked outside the United States prior to immigrating and provided earnings data for their last job there. Information on work time and pay periods were used to adjust for differences in labor supply across workers in order to convert all data on pay to full-time earnings. The advantage of this data source is that earnings were elicited in a common survey frame, and there is information on the number of years of schooling for each worker along with gender and age. Thus the cross-country wage (equation 11) can be estimated directly. The disadvantage is that the immigrants are not a random sample of workers in the home country. 
The second source of information that can be used to estimate skill prices is the Occupational Wages around the World (OWW) database, compiled by Freeman and Oostendorp (2000). This source provides monthly wage data for men in 161 
66 | MARK R. ROSENZWEIG 
occupations in more than 150 countries from 1983 to 2003, derived from the International Labour Organisation’s October Inquiry database. Presumably, within countries the data are representative of all workers, but not all countries are represented in all years, and fewer countries appear to have participated in more recent years. For this analysis, data from 1995 were selected, which is a year with a peak number of countries and close in time to the NIS-P information on wages. In that year, there are 4,924 observations representing 67 countries. Monthly earnings from the series expressed in U.S. dollars based on exchange rates, as estimated by Freeman and Oostendorp, are used.7 The disadvantages of this data set are that the information across countries may not be comparable. Moreover, there is no information on the schooling or age of workers. Instead, the set of occupational indicators must be used to standardize across workers for skills. In particular, for the OWW data set, skill units are a nonparametric function of industry and occupation; that is, 
(12) xij ijexp(Iijk k), 
so that 
(13) Ln(Wij) Ln j Iijk k Ln ij, 
where Iijk is a vector of occupation or industry dummies for worker i in country j, and k is a vector of coefficients. Again, the country-specific set of intercepts provides the set of skill prices for 67 countries for 1995.8 
Both of the data sets provide comparable information on skill prices for, at most, only 67 countries. To predict skill prices for more countries, Rosenzweig (2006) uses information on aggregate country characteristics that are available for a large number of countries to estimate the proximate determinants of skill prices from the comparable worldwide microwage data. The analysis makes use of the fact that the skill price is the marginal value product of skill and assumes that aggregate output for country j is produced according to Cobb-Douglas technology. The estimation procedure also attempts to correct for the selectivity of the NIS-P immigrant sample, that selectivity being based on the decision to immigrate. The estimates are used to predict skill prices for countries without sampled workers. One shortcoming of using the NIS-P base for predicting skill prices is that, because of the limited degrees of freedom, it is not possible to allow the return to schooling to differ across countries. Similarly, for the analysis of OWW earnings, the coefficient vector for industry and occupation is assumed to be invariant to country. 
Figure 2 displays the NIS-P and OWW estimates of skill prices for 19 Asian countries. The figure shows that both sets of data yield similar, but not identical, skillprice estimates (the correlation across all countries is more than 0.66). Both sets of estimates indicate the substantial differences in skill prices across countries within Asia. For example, the skill price in Singapore is 9 to 12 times that in Bangladesh, and the skill price in Korea is 3.4 to 5.5 times the skill price in Bangladesh. To see how these differences in skill price translate into differences in earnings by level of schooling, we can compute earnings for any level of schooling and return to schooling, , using equation 11 for any country based on its skill price. Figure 3 shows the 
HIGHER EDUCATION AND INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION IN ASIA | 67 
FIGURE 2 Estimated Skill Price for 19 Asian Countries, by NIS-P and OWW Sources 
Taiwan Singapore Hong Kong Malaysia Japan Korea Thailand Pakistan China Indonesia Bangladesh Philippines Vietnam Sri Lanka Nepal Laos Mongolia India Cambodia 
0 2,000 4,000 6,000 8,000 
Purchasing power parity–adjusted 1995 dollars 
Source: Author’s calculations based on OWW Database (Freeman and Oostendorp 2005); Jasso and others (2000). 
4,000 
3,000 
2,000 
1,0000 
OWW skill price ( 10) NIS–P skill price 
10,000 12,000 14,000 16,000 
FIGURE 3 Estimated Earnings of High School and College Graduates across Select Countries with a Common 7 Percent “Return” to Schooling Purchasing Power Parity–Adjusted 1996 Dollars Using NIS-P Skill Prices 
7,000 
High school graduate 6,000 
College graduate 
5,000 
Nigeria India Indonesia Mexico Korea, Rep. of 
Source: OWW Database (Freeman and Oostendorp 2005); Jasso and others 2000; Rosenzweig 2006. 
68 | MARK R. ROSENZWEIG 
estimated earnings for a select number of countries, based on the NIS-P estimated skill price for each country under the assumption that the return to schooling, , is the same in each country and is 7 percent (the estimated world return in Rosenzweig 2006). As can be seen, earnings for persons of comparable schooling differ substantially across countries. 
There are two important features of figure 3. First, the gains from migration (cross-country differences in earnings) are greater the higher the level of schooling of the individual. The migration of skilled persons from low to high skill-price countries leads to greater global gains in output. Second, raising the level of schooling in each country—say, so all have a college education, even ignoring the depression of skill prices via a general-equilibrium effect—would do very little to decrease the differences in earnings across countries. Put another way, equalizing cross-country skillprice differences would have a substantially greater impact on world inequality than would equalizing education levels across countries. 
How do differences in domestic returns to schooling across countries affect differences in global earnings? In figure 4, earnings for high school and college graduates are computed for Bangladesh and Korea, based on their NIS-P skill prices but assuming alternative rates of return to schooling of 7 and 10 percent. As can be seen, increasing domestic returns to schooling significantly affects earnings; if returns to schooling reflect school quality, then increasing school quality in a low skill-price country can, for a given level of schooling, reduce earnings disparities relative to high skill-price countries. Thus an increase in the return to schooling from 0.07 to 0.1 in Bangladesh, while keeping the return to schooling in Korea at 0.07, shrinks the 
FIGURE 4 Estimated Annual Earnings in Bangladesh and Korea, by Level of Schooling and Return to Schooling 
12,000 
High school College 
10,000 
8,000 
6,000 
4,000 
2,0000 
Bangladesh 
Korea ( 0.07) 
( 0.07) 
Source: Author’s calculations based on Jasso and others 2000. 
Bangladesh ( 0.10) 
Korea ( 0.10) 
HIGHER EDUCATION AND INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION IN ASIA | 69 
absolute differential in the earnings of college graduates across the two countries by 26 percent. However, the absolute gap remains large. Moreover, an increase in the return to schooling in both countries widens the gap even more at the college level. Of course, raising school quality, if it changes the amount of skill in the economy, would reduce the skill price (ignoring large trade effects). One question is whether increasing the quality of domestic schooling for a given domestic skill price would decrease the outflow of students to study abroad, as suggested in the migration cum schooling model. We now turn to estimates of the determinants of foreign student outflows. 
Where Do U.S. Foreign Students Come From? Determinants of Student Outflows to the United States 
We first estimate an approximation to the student outflow equation (5) using data on the number of students by country of origin who are studying in tertiary institutions in the United States. As we have seen, the United States is the dominant country of destination for foreign students both globally and from Asia. Data from the United States are also used because there is reasonably precise information on student enrollment in tertiary institutions by source country and because, as discussed below, there is unique information on foreign students who remain in the United States after completing their schooling. This makes it possible to estimate the loss of human capital associated with foreign study. 
There are two sources of data on foreign students in the United States: counts of F-1 student visas issued each year by the State Department and the Student and Exchange Visitor Information System (SEVIS), which provides information by country on the stock of current foreign-born students. The advantage of the latter is that all foreign-born students are required to register in the system. Because Canadian citizens do not need an F-1 visa to study in the United States, they are not included in the State Department flow data. Moreover, the SEVIS data exclude family members of students, who are included in the visa flow information. And the State Department visa counts include persons who do not actually use their visa to come to the United States. We use here the SEVIS data on the current stock (2006) of students in the United States by country.9 
Inspection of the SEVIS data indicate that all of the top five sending countries for students enrolled in U.S. schools are in Asia: in order, Korea, India, China, Japan, and Taiwan (China). Indeed, seven of the top 10 countries of origin are in Asia (Thailand and Indonesia are 9 and 10). This list obviously contains a mixture of high and low skill-price Asian countries, as well as countries of very different sizes, and thus is not very informative about how origin-country skill prices influence student flows. To carry out the analysis of how skill prices and the quantity and quality of colleges and universities affect the number of students who come to the United States to study, more information is needed than the skill prices. 
To characterize the number and quality of domestic universities and colleges, we add to the database the number of universities in each country and a variable 
70 | MARK R. ROSENZWEIG 
indicating whether any of the country’s universities were ranked in the top 200 of all universities in the world from the Times Higher World University Rankings for 2005.10 We also compute the mean rank of the ranked universities, if any. If domestic quality lowers the gains from foreign study, we would expect that countries with ranked universities would, everything else remaining the same, experience smaller outflows of students. Similarly, the lower the mean rank (the higher the quality) of the universities, the greater the outflow of students. The effects on student outflows of the number of universities, for a given quality, are less clear. Approximately half of foreign students in the United States come as graduate students (IIE 2006); increasing the supply of college graduates in a country thus increases the potential supply of graduate students who study abroad. To the extent that graduate study in a foreign country improves the prospects of obtaining a foreign job and thus an immigrant visa, building domestic capacity in universities, without improving quality, could increase per capita rates of (graduate) study abroad and thus increase the risk of losing the best and brightest. 
Three variables are included that are related to the cost of acquiring schooling abroad. The first is the surface distance from the capital of each country to the nearest port of entry for immigrants in the United States, which we assume to be positively correlated with the costs of migration. The second variable is whether or not English is an official language of the sending country. Presumably, given that the language of instruction in the United States is English, students from countries in which English is prevalent face lower costs of studying in the United States. Finally, financing education abroad is costly: as reported by the Institute of International Education (IIE 2006), the primary source of funding is “personal and family” for about 64 percent of foreign students (about half for graduate students and more than 82 percent for undergraduates). Thus income matters for study abroad. We add the sending country’s GDP per adult-equivalent to the database, which we assume is positively related to the average capacity of individuals to finance migration. Thus, for a given skill price, a country with a higher GDP per adult-equivalent should be observed to send more migrants. Economic growth can increase out-migration, if it is not accompanied by sufficient increases in skill prices. In prior analyses of international migration, GDP is used to proxy wage rates, thus mixing together skill prices and financing constraints. 
Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for the country database, and table 2 reports estimates of the origin country-specific determinants of the number of foreign students studying in the United States for two specifications: one using the NIS-P skillprice estimates and the other using the OWW-based estimates of skill prices. Both specifications include the size of the sending-country population. All variables are in log form.11 
The estimated skill-price coefficients are consistent with the implication of the model: students obtaining schooling outside their home country are motivated, in part, by the gains from permanent migration in the country where they go for their schooling—the number of U.S. students from a country outside the United States is negatively and significantly related to its skill price. Recall that if all students expect to return, a rise in the domestic skill price would increase the demand for schooling
﻿The Role of Higher Education in Economic Development 
Higher Education Alliance for the Rock River Region 
Contributors Northern Illinois University Rockford College Rock Valley College University of Illinois College of Medicine at Rockford 
Prepared by NIU Outreach May, 2005 
The Role of Higher Education in Economic Development 
Executive Summary 
The HEARRR members – Northern Illinois University, Rockford College, Rock Valley College, and the University of Illinois College of Medicine – have allocated fiscal, physical, and human resources, and created entrepreneurship systems to advance economic development. 
Major Trends in the Rock River Region 
This area is undergoing demographic and industry changes that impact its economic development and that relate directly to education. 
 Population is projected to increase 9 percent from 2000 to 2010, with increasing populations for those of Hispanic heritage and for those aged 55 to 64. 
 Severe downsizing in the manufacturing sector meant the loss of 10,000 jobs. 
 Jobs in manufacturing and other areas now typically require post-secondary education. 
 Health services, construction, and logistics have strong growth projections and offer high compensation per employee. 
Ten Ways HEARRR Strengthens the Regional Economy 
1. Raising educational levels to create a quality workforce by enrolling 18,000 students annually in 64 certificate programs, 5 apprenticeship programs, 25 associate degree programs, 80 bachelor’s degree programs, 11 master’s degree programs, 4 advanced nursing degrees, a doctor of medicine degree, and a post-doctoral certificate in medicine 2. Improving learning and teaching from pre-school through graduate school through working with the public schools and by securing over $10 million in competitive grants. 3. Training and supporting – where you need it, when you need it – over 1,000 businesses 
and 4,000 employees each year, and through programs such as the Rock River Entrepreneurship Center Network, Small Business Development Centers, and the Procurement Technical Assistance program. 4. Providing lifelong learning opportunities to over 15,000 students a year through continuing education, GED, adult basic education, and English as Second Language programs, as well as the Jane Addams Center for Civic Public Engagement 5. Identifying the needs of business and industry by including them on nearly 80 advisory 
committees for academic and professional programs. 6. Taking strong and visible roles in regional initiatives through partnerships that involve 
hundreds of local public and private agencies. 7. Disseminating research and promoting technology transfer through over 25 specialized 
research studies and by working with legislators to procure $6 million for the AgTech and EIGERlab initiatives 8. Enhancing the technology infrastructure through NIUNet, a fiber optic network to give the 
Rock River Region broadband access to the world, and by offering programs in information technology, biotechnology, engineering, and applied technologies. 9. Promoting livable communities through extensive regional arts programming and NCAA 
athletics. 10. Employing a diverse workforce with an annual payroll in excess of $66 million, which 
generates an additional $24.8 million in income for Winnebago County alone. 
Executive Summary: The Role of Higher Education in Economic Development 
Introduction The role of higher education as a major driver of economic development is well established, and this role will increase as further changes in technology, globalization, and demographics impact the United States. To remain competitive in light of these changes, regions will need to improve productivity and adopt an innovative spirit. Higher education has the capacity, knowledge, and research necessary to help achieve these goals (Sampson, 2003; 2004). 
The focus of this report is the role of higher education in the economic development of Illinois’ Rock River Region. A brief summary of economic development issues in this region is given, followed by a general discussion of the role of higher education in economic development and specific actions taken by the institutions of the Higher Education Alliance for the Rock River Region (HEARRR): Northern Illinois University, Rockford College, Rock Valley College, and University of Illinois College of Medicine. 
The Rock River Region Rockford is the largest metropolitan area in the Northern Stateline Economic Development Region and within Winnebago County, which accounts for three-fourths of the employment within the region (NIU, May 2004). The area is undergoing demographic and industry changes which impact its economic development and which relate directly to education. 
Demographic Changes From 2000 to 2010, the population of the region is projected to increase 9 percent. During this same period, the population of those with a Hispanic origin is projected to increase 47 percent, increasing the relative proportion of Hispanics in the total population from 7.4 percent to 10.1 percent (Woods & Poole, 2003). In 2000, 7.1 percent of the families in Winnebago County and 12.3 percent of the families in Boone County spoke Spanish in the home (NIU, 2004). Ways to use this increasing diversity to enhance the economic development of the region need to be explored. 
From 2000 to 2010, the percent of the population age 55 to 64 is projected to increase 45.7 percent. The region needs to assess how, and whether, to replace these nearly 15,000 retirement age workers in the workforce (Woods & Poole, 2003). 
Industry Changes The Rock River Region is recognized as a leading national manufacturing center; however, from 1999 through 2003, the region lost 10,000 manufacturing jobs. Even though there is a 2.6 percent projected decrease in manufacturing from 2000 to 2010, there are sub-sectors within manufacturing with projected increases. These sub-sectors require advanced technical skills, and dislocated workers need additional training to re-tool for these growth positions. For the manufacturing sector, critical shortage occupations identified include CNC programmers, CNC operators, machinists, and welders, all of which require postsecondary education and training (NIU, May 2004). 
The Role of Higher Education in Economic Development Page 3 of 12 
Chart 1 reflects the relative strength of industry in terms of the projected growth from 2000 to 2010 and compensation per employee. The size of the circle depicts total regional employment in that industry. As depicted in Chart 1, health services, construction, and logistics not only have strong growth projections but also offer high compensation per employee. The greatest need is for registered nurses; training for an entry-level registered nurse position requires postsecondary education. Other examples of career growth areas include speech pathology, occupational therapy, and physical therapy (NIU, May 2004). 
Chart 1. Compensation per Employee by Industry 
40.00%High Growth 
High Growth Low Compensation 
High Compensation 
Business Services 
30.00% 
0 102-0002e tarh tworGSocial Services 20.00% 
Automobile 
Health Services 
Recreation 
R i 
Personal 
Educational 
Construction 
10.00% 
Services 
Services 
Hotels and Lodging 
Wholesale Trade 
Low Growth High Compensation -10.00% 
$- $5,000.00 $10,000.00 $15,000.00 $20,000.00 $25,000.00 $30,000.00 $35,000.00 $40,000.00 $45,000.00 $50,000.00 
Compensation per Employee 
Logistics 
Retail Trade 
0.00% 
Manufacturing 
Low Growth Low Compensation 
The critical challenge for the region is how best to provide strategically the workforce needed to strengthen economic development. Historically, employees could earn sufficient wages with a high school diploma or a two-year college degree, which is one reason why the region has a baccalaureate completion rate lower than that of the state. With recent and anticipated technological and industry changes, more positions will require some college education, and there will be an ongoing need for continuing education. Raising the educational and skill levels of the region is vital; however, this will not result in economic growth unless training is strategically coordinated to meet current and potential industry needs and is accessible to all potential workers. 
The Role of Higher Education in Economic Development Page 4 of 12 
Higher Education’s Role Higher education has historically included economic development as part of its core mission. The colleges and universities serving the region have allocated fiscal, physical, and human resources and created entrepreneurship systems within the institutions to advance economic development. Senior administrators provide strong, visible leadership designed to 
 create a quality workforce by growing, training, and attracting the finest talent 
 support current business and industry 
 improve learning and teaching from pre-school through graduate school 
 take strong and visible roles in regional initiatives 
 disseminate research and promote technology transfer 
 enhance the technology infrastructure 
 promote livable communities 
 employ a diverse workforce 
A Quality Workforce: Growing, Training, and Attracting the Finest Higher education will be a dominant, if not decisive, factor in preparing workers with the robust skills needed to adapt to changing job requirements. The transition from manufacturing to the technology-based new economy dramatically raised the skill level needed to get a job. By 2005, 85 percent of all new jobs in America will require some level of higher education. The requirements for current jobs are changing as well; from 1973 to 2003, the percent of workers age 30 to 59 with some postsecondary education increased from 28 to 60 percent, and nearly three-fourths of the increase in the need for postsecondary education was due to “upskilling” – employer demands for higher skills (Sampson, 2003; Sampson, 2004; Carnevale & Desrochers, 2003). In addition, higher education will be called upon to address the impending shortage of college-trained workers needed to replace the baby boomers; by 2030, nearly 30 percent of the workforce will be at or over the retirement age (Sampson, 2003). 
Higher education prepares a quality workforce by offering instructional programs, matching instruction to the needs of business and industry, and helping individuals learn throughout their lives. 
Instructional Programs Teaching excellence is the key to a strong and growing regional economy (Sampson, 2004). Higher education offers quality programs and services and continually improves these programs to ensure teaching and learning excellence. Instructional programs can be traditional credit programs or non-credit programs. 
 The Alliance institutions offer a wide variety of credit instructional programming in the Rockford area, including approximately 64 certificate programs, 5 apprenticeship programs, 25 associate degree programs, 80 bachelor degree majors, 11 master degree programs, 4 advanced nursing degrees, a professional program leading to a medical degree, and a post-doctorate certificate in medicine. 
 Over 18,000 students enroll annually in credit programs offered in Rockford by the Alliance institutions. In the past two years, the annual enrollment in Rockford courses increased 11 percent. 
The Role of Higher Education in Economic Development Page 5 of 12 
Identifying Needs of Business and Industry Higher education connects workforce development to the economic development of the region by matching instructional programs to the needs of business. Efforts include working with business to identify specific needs, providing work-based learning opportunities for students, offering and supporting apprenticeship programs, and convening and being responsive to advisory committees with representatives from business and industry. Once needs are identified, higher education and industry work together to attract students into critical programs. 
 The members of the Alliance match instructional programs to the economic growth needs of the region. In the past three years, they have completed over 35 assessments in various labor market sectors to explore the need and feasibility of instructional programs. 
 Numerous students complete internships, practicums, and student teaching in the Rock River Region. The University of Illinois College of Medicine has a Family Practice Residency Program and a College of Pharmacy Clerkship program. 
 Over 80 advisory committees with representatives from business and industry provide input into the programs offered by members of the Alliance. 
Lifelong Learning of Individuals Higher education helps individuals achieve their potential. “Just as ‘no child should be left behind’ in getting a good education, ... no worker should be left behind in having the skills necessary to find a good job in the 21st century workplace” (Sampson, 2002, p. 3). Higher education offers lifelong learning opportunities to individuals in these ways: 
 Over 15,000 students take non-credit courses for personal development each year. Courses are available to upgrade work skills, meet professional licensing requirements, change jobs and careers, as well as programs for learning in retirement and for children. 
 An average of over 700 dislocated workers utilized training and/or employment services at Alliance institutions over the past three years. 
 Members of the alliance coordinate and network with social agencies to help the low income and low-skilled workers through programs such
 Alliance institutions provide support programs for special and minority populations, such as disability services and programs for at-risk youth. 
 Over 500 students enroll in GED and adult basic education courses offered by members of the Alliance to improve their basic skills. Rock Valley College and Rockford College have programs dedicated to English as a Second Language instruction. 
 The Alliance institutions provide career services to help workers navigate an uncertain career path, such as the career and college fairs, financial aid outreach programs, and student ambassador program of Rock Valley College. 
 Students from the alliance institutions serve as student teachers, interns, and consultants for institutions in the region. 
The Role of Higher Education in Economic Development Page 6 of 12 
Support to Current Business and Industry Current business and industry receives support through the customized services offered by higher education. As technology and the economic climate change, higher education can be a valuable resource to businesses in these ways: 
 identifying employee skills gaps and providing customized training 
 conducting organizational assessments and providing management development 
 providing technical assistance, industrial liaison programs, and support centers 
 assisting in the identification of new markets for products 
 offering specialized help for small-to-medium sized businesses for planning, resource acquisition, and marketing, e.g., entrepreneurship training and assistance 
 providing customized research and data 
 procuring grants which support current business and industry 
 providing conference and meeting facilities 
Examples of Alliance member support for current business and industry include: 
 Members of the Alliance provide customized training and services to businesses. Annually, over 100 businesses and 4,000 employees participate in these programs. 
 The Illinois Manufacturing Extension Center, housed at NIU Rockford, provides assistance in engineering, technical needs, information technology and marketing support for small and medium-sized businesses. Annually, over 75 businesses use this service. 
 Rock River Valley Entrepreneurship Center Network, Small Business Development Centers, and the Procurement Technical Assistance program serve 800 clients annually. 
 Health Systems Research provides an array of reports for hospitals, health departments, and government agencies, one of which resulted in “three share” health insurance. 
 Each of the Alliance institutions offers meeting space, with high-quality conference planning and hosting available. Specialized theatre and musical performance space is available as well. 
Learning and Teaching from Pre-school through Graduate School Higher educational institutions work with P-12 schools to help prepare students with the increasingly higher-level skills needed to obtain and retain employment. Preparing sufficient numbers of students will be challenging, because there is a perceived “mismatch between the jobs and careers of the new economy and the current core high school curricula and pedagogy” (Carnevale & Desrochers, 2003, p. v). Together, higher education and P-12 school districts can create a pipeline of workers by doing the following: 
 emphasizing the importance of rigorous course work 
 aligning P-16 curricula to the new economic skill sets 
 providing career information 
 coordinating work-focused training, including Tech Prep and Perkins programs 
 establishing articulation agreements to provide seamless instruction 
 identifying ways to increase the value placed on education within the region 
The Role of Higher Education in Economic Development Page 7 of 12 
Examples of P-20 initiatives of the Alliance institutions include the following: 
 Over the past five years, the Alliance institutions have obtained over $10 million dollars dedicated to improving P-20 education in this region. Their faculty and staff are working directly with the schools. Grants are aimed at improving the quality of education and the pool of future teachers, with a special emphasis on bilingual education. 
 Over 1,000 high school students each year receive college-level credit at one of the Alliance institutions through dual credit, Tech Prep, high school honors, and other programs. 
 The U of I College of Medicine and Rock Valley College are active in recruiting youth for health careers. 
 English as a Second Language programs are offered by Rockford College, Rock Valley College, and NIU. 
 Rockford College, through Public Agenda, provides a forum for discussions on improving public education. 
Strong and Visible Roles in Regional Initiatives Efforts to enhance economic growth are shifting from tax-based incentives to attract businesses to strategies that develop industry clusters designed to increase regional competitiveness and wealth. The success of the industry clusters depends on the region’s science and technology capacity; ability to develop global markets; availability of lifelong learning and training for employers and employees; and collaborative relationships among research, capital, business, and public policy (Ganzglass et al., 2003). Higher education, with its networks and linkages throughout the region and state, is uniquely positioned to convene the necessary representatives from the diverse government, business, education, social, and civic groups and to serve as the third-party, neutral catalyst to create the collaborations needed to develop industry clusters. 
The Alliance institutions are highly involved in regional initiatives, as noted below: 
 The members of the Alliance are integrally involved with workforce initiatives, such as Economic Development Council, Rockford Health Council, City of Rockford steering committees, Rockford Area Economic Development Council, Greater Rockford Chamber of Commerce, and other chambers of commerce in the region. 
 Special projects with the Workforce Investment Boards identified critical skill shortages and areas of potential economic development. 
 The Alliance institutions are involved with the Rockford Area Arts Council, Illinois Articulation Initiative, Career Education Association of North Central Illinois, Illinois Community College On-line initiative, international study consortiums, and La Voz Latina. 
 The University of Illinois College of Medicine collaborates with the Winnebago Health Department, Black Health Care Coalition, National Center for Rural Health Professions, Rural medical Education Program, Project EXPORT, Northern Illinois Area Health 
The Role of Higher Education in Economic Development Page 8 of 12 
Education Center, the WHO Collaborating Center, and provides healthcare in three rural centers. 
 Participation in the R.I.C.E. initiative led to the RVC-NIU Partnership. 
Research and Technology Transfer Research and practical, application-based technology are needed to create sustainable economic growth. Research conducted by higher education enhances the economic development of a region in various ways: 
 conducting economic and social research, including community audits, community forums, and leadership briefings, used to identify assets; gaps in the economic, social, and cultural infrastructure; critical skill shortages; growth opportunities; and trends in the economic climate of the region 
 facilitating technology transfer of basic and applied research which results in the design, development, production, and commercialization of new or improved products, services, or processes, with the ultimate outcome of creating new industries, capital ventures, and jobs 
 forming research partnerships with business which result in new technologies, industries, and jobs 
Examples of support for research and technology transfer by the members include the following: 
 Over 25 specialized research studies are completed annually to address issues within the Rock River Region, including Regional Economic Index Charts, Northwest Illinois Market Facts, and Health Systems Research. 
 NIU, working with Congressman Don Manzullo, procured $1.5 million for the Belvidere Boone AgTech Initiative. 
 Members of the Alliance are partners in the Building Manufacturing Capacity initiative and were instrumental in securing $5.5 million for research that will take place at EigerLab. 
 Other projects, which involve the transfer of knowledge, include the Center for Systems Security and Information Assurance, the Jane Addams Center for Civic Engagement, the Public Agenda, the Northern Illinois Center for Non Profit Excellence, Pierce Programs, Project EXPORT, and the National Center for Rural Health Professions. 
Enhance the Technology Infrastructure Higher education can be a technology driver and instrumental in raising the economic development of the region by doing the following: 
 designing cutting-edge technologies which result in new products, businesses, and jobs 
 supplying advanced technology for use by the region 
 providing technology instruction to create a skilled workforce 
 addressing the digital divide for targeted areas and populations 
 creating e-learning and innovative delivery to expand access to education 
The Role of Higher Education in Economic Development Page 9 of 12 
Examples of support for enhancing the technology infrastructure by Alliance institutions include the following: 
 In addition to certificate, associate degree, baccalaureate, and master degree programs in information technology, biotechnology, engineering, and applied technologies, the Alliance institutions look for ways to increase the region’s information literacy through programs with the Northwest Community Center, on-line credit and non-credit courses, and other e-learning initiatives. 
 NIU and RVC are working together to be one of three nanotechnology educations centers in the United States. 
 NIU is developing NIUNet, a fiber optic network that will connect to RockNet and give the Rock River Region broadband access to the world. 
Livable Communities Livable communities are viewed as great places to live and work. Higher education institutions provide instruction and training, but they also provide arts, entertainment, sports, and recreation programs that attract and retain a quality workforce. Professional-quality events are available to the public free or at reasonable costs. 
 The members of the Alliance add a breadth and depth to regional arts through programs such as Rockford College’s Performing Arts Series, Art Gallery, Common Destinies Series, Inside Rockford College Film and Speaker Series, annual Phi Beta Kappa Speaker, and Forum Lecture Series; Rock Valley College’s Bengt Sjostrom Theatre, Studio Theatre, Annual Shakespeare Festival, Summer Starlight Theatre Program, community chorale, chamber singers, orchestra, jazz band, old-time band, and various lecture series; and NIU’s and Rockford College Music Academy student and faculty performances and participation in the Rockford Symphony and other musical groups and theater; and NIU performances and exhibitions in all of the fine arts. Joint faculty collaborations between NIU Community School of the Arts and the Rockford College Music Academy are ongoing. 
 Public Radio stations WNIU and WNIJ serve the region from NIU. Selected administrators, faculty, and staff at each of the Alliance institutions provide consultation, press comments, expert commentary, and interviews. 
 There are 13 men’s and women’s NCAA Division III teams as well as 7 sports represented in the North Central Community Conference of the NJCAA. Athletic events provide entertainment for the region. 
 Members of the Alliance sponsor study abroad trips to more than a dozen countries in Europe, Latin America, Africa, and Asia and present hundreds of cultural performances each year. 
 Research conducted by Alliance institutions improved public schools, museums, libraries, parks, housing, mental health, wellness, and drug prevention efforts. 
The Role of Higher Education in Economic Development Page 10 of 12 
 Healthy living is promoted through the Golden Eagles fitness program and the CHIP program. 
 RVC Dental Hygiene Clinic provides affordable and accessible dental care to the community. 
Higher Education as Employer The role of higher education as a major employer of a diverse pool of workers cannot be ignored. As a basic, revenue-generating industry, higher education directly, and through related multipliers, impacts the economy of the region. 
 The Alliance institutions in Rockford have an annual payroll in excess of $66 million, which generates an additional $24.8 million income in Winnebago County. 
Summary The region faces many economic challenges and opportunities; whether it barely survives or thrives depends upon the region’s ability to identify long-term, collaborative strategies that will create a strong, versatile economy. The region has tremendous work ahead, and there are no quick fixes if the underlying economic infrastructure is to be strengthened. 
The loss of 10,000 manufacturing jobs was a massive blow to the economy; however, the challenge is not only how to replace the jobs but how to create a workforce with the skills needed for the new economy. No longer will a high school diploma be sufficient to obtain a good paying position. Healthcare, the area of greatest projected growth, is built on highly trained workers with postsecondary degrees. Manufacturing will still be a major part of the economy of the region, but the jobs require advanced technology training. 
To create the educational infrastructure needed to support a thriving economy, all sectors, private and public, need to adopt a shared commitment to increase the value placed on education and to improve the educational programs so there is a continuous pipeline of students who graduate from high school with the requisite skills to succeed in postsecondary education. A high school curriculum designed for students who might have been employed immediately after graduation in the 1990s does not develop the skills and knowledge needed by workers in the new economy or postsecondary students today. 
The HEARRR institutions serving the region offer a myriad of programs and services and have had a significant, continuing impact on the economic development of the region. Together, the institutions of higher education invite the public and private sectors, including business and industry, education, civic groups, not-for-profits, governments, and all citizens, to join them in working together to leverage the resources of the region. Their primary task is to create a longterm, sustainable economy based on seamless educational programs, a strategic physical infrastructure, and livable communities that will attract and retain high quality workers. 
For more information, contact Penny Billman, Ph.D., at NIU Outreach, via e-mail at pbillman@niu.edu or at (815) 753-0928. 
The Role of Higher Education in Economic Development Page 11 of 12 
Bibliography 
Carnevale, A.P. and Desrochers, D.M. 2003. Standards for What? The Economic Roots 
of K-16 Reform. Princeton, NJ: ETS. 
Ganzglass, E., Simon, M., Masseo, C., & Conlin, K. 2003. A Governor’s Guide to Creating a 
21st-Century Workforce. Washington, D.C.: National Governors Association. 
Northern Illinois University, May 2004. Northern Stateline Economic Development Region: 
Critical Skills Shortage Report Manufacturing Industry. DeKalb, IL: NIU Outreach, Center for Governmental Studies. 
Northern Illinois University, 2004. Kids Count Data. DeKalb, IL: NIU Outreach. 
Pappas, J.P. and Eckart, C.M. 1997. “Strategies for the Future: Continuing Higher Education and 
Economic Development,” New Directions for Higher Education, 97(3), 96-101. 
Sampson, D. June 10, 2002. Remarks for Economic Development EDA Denver Regional 
Forum. Denver, CO. 
Sampson, D. March 4, 2003. Remarks for the National Association of Workforce Boards. 
Washington, D.C. 
Sampson, D. November 12, 2003. Remarks for the National Association of State Universities 
and Land-Grant Colleges. New Orleans, LA. 
Sampson, D. June 10, 2004. Remarks for the National Coalition for Advanced Manufacturing. 
Washington, D.C. 
Woods and Poole Economics, Inc. 2003. County Projections to 2025. Washington, D.C.: Woods 
& Poole Economics, Inc. 
The Role of Higher Education in Economic Development Page 12 of 12
﻿IMS Business School Presents Doctoral Colloquium – 2017 ISBN: 978-93-85895-57-9 
The Role of Higher Education in Economic Development 
Nisha Kumari, Aditya Sharma 
Assistant Professor, Dewan V.S Group of Institutions, Meerut, Uttar Pradesh, India 
Abstract “The Narendra Modi government is passionate about education, although it has been censured at times for trying to 'Saffronise' learning” The aim of the paper is to develop Indian economy growth and its impact of upcoming scenario. In the modern world education is becoming the most important resource for economic and social development of countries, improving well-being and individual development of citizens. Education in every sense is one of the fundamental factors of development. No country can achieve sustainable economic development without substantial investment in human capital. Education enriches people’s understanding of themselves and world. It improves the quality of their lives and leads to broad social benefits to individuals and society. Education raises people’s productivity and creativity and promotes entrepreneurship and technological advances. In addition it plays a very crucial role in securing economic and social progress and improving income distribution. Our higher education institutions serve and enrich society in many ways and their role in modern Ireland is multi-faceted 
Keywords: Human Development, Economic Growth, Poverty, Labour Productivity, Education, Technology, Trade, Health 
1. Introduction India holds an important place in the global education industry. The country has more than 1.4 million schools with over 227 million students enrolled and more than 36,000 higher education institutes. India has one of the largest higher education systems in the world. However, there is still a lot of potential for further development in the education system. The main purpose of this paper is to show the role of education in economic development and the effect of education on labour productivity, poverty, trade, technology, health, income distribution and family structure. Education provides a foundation for development, the ground work on which much of our economic and social well-being is built. It is the key to increasing economic efficiency and social consistency. By increasing the value and efficiency of their labor, it helps to raise the poor from poverty. It increases the overall productivity and intellectual flexibility of the labor force. It helps to ensure that a country is competitive in world markets now characterized by changing technologies and production methods. 
1.1 The Importance of Education in Economic Development (a) Various government initiatives are being adopted to boost the growth of distance education market, besides focussing on new education techniques, such as E- learning and M-learning. (b) Education sector has seen a host of reforms and improved financial outlays in recent years that could possibly transform the country into a knowledge haven. With human resource increasingly gaining significance in the overall development of the country, development of education infrastructure is expected to remain the key focus in the current decade. In this scenario, infrastructure investment in the education sector is likely to see a considerable increase in the current decade Moreover, availability of English speaking tech-educated talent, democratic governance and a strong legal and 
intellectual property protection framework are enablers for world class product development, as per Mr. Amit Phadnis, President-Engineering and Site Leader for Cisco (India). (c) The Government of India has taken several steps including opening of IIT’s and IIM’s in new locations as well as allocating educational grants for research scholars in most government institutions. Furthermore, with online modes of education being used by several educational organizations, the higher education sector in India is set for some major changes and developments in the years to come. (d) Prior to the nineteenth century, systematic investment in human capital was not considered especially important in any country. Expenditures on schooling, on-the-job training, and other similar forms of investment were quite small. This began to change radically during this century with the application of science to the development of new goods and more efficient methods of production, first in Great Britain, and then gradually in other countries. (e) Many countries are now on the brink of a further increase in access to secondary and higher education and in effecting spectacular improvements in the quality of education offered at all levels. As increasing numbers of students complete their basic education, their demand for education at higher levels is similarly increasing. Educating girls and women is probably the single most effective investment a developing country can make, whether or not women work outside the home. It creates a multitude of positive remunerations for families including better family health and nutrition, improved birth spacing, lower infant and child mortality, and enhanced educational attainment of children. 
Market Size The education sector in India is poised to witness major growth in the years to come as India will have world’s largest International Journal of Commerce and Management Research, Toll Free: 1800-1234-070 65
IMS Business School Presents Doctoral Colloquium – 2017 ISBN: 978-93-85895-57-9 
tertiary-age population and second largest graduate talent pipeline globally by the end of 2020. As of now the education market is worth US$ 100 billion. Currently, higher education contributes 59.7 per cent of the market size, school education 38.1 per cent, pre-school segment 1.6 per cent, and technology and multi-media the remaining 0.6 per cent. Higher education system in India has undergone rapid expansion. Currently, India’s higher education system is the largest in the world enrolling over 70 million students while in less than two decades, India has managed to create additional capacity for over 40 million students. At present, higher education sector witnesses spending of over Rs 46,200 crore (US$ 6.96 billion), and it is expected to grow at an average annual rate of over 18 per cent to reach Rs 232,500 crore (US$ 35.03 billion) in next 10 years. 
1.2 The Government of India Rule’s in Promoting Education Policy Even as education budgets have drawn mixed reactions, skill and formal learning have been intricately linked, and budgetary allocations suggest a strong shift towards higher education. New institutes of excellence have been announced, making development more regionally balanced with states such as Jammu and Kashmir, Bihar, Himachal Pradesh and Assam getting AIIMS, IITs and IIMs. “The government has done a few good things such as launching a programme that allows us to invite people from abroad at government’s expense which has made it easy for universities to invite foreign faculty. A ranking system in India is being launched in which JNU is also participating and varsities are also going to adopt villages. But we have not seen much enhancement in budgetary allocation and resources continue to be a constraint,” said Sudhir Kumar Sopory, vice-chancellor of Jawaharlal Nehru University. The Modi government has come under attack over its alleged tendency to centralize the education system. “There seems to be a lack of policy in HRD. The tendency to centralize is detrimental. Autonomy is essential for universities. More is good and not less. The new Central Universities Act is a clear evidence of this centralization,” said Mridula Mukherjee, professor of history at JNU. “Look at the move to frame a new education policy. Government must understand that educational systems and policies evolve over a long period of time and cannot be tinkered with every change of government. 
1.3 India is promoting toward Higher Education in India: According to the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry-Ernst & Young (FICCI-EY) report 
on higher education in India, the year 2030 marks 20 years of accelerated educational reforms in the country. Despite remarkable strides of progress, India’s higher education institutions are not yet the best in the world. Demographically, by 2030, India will be the youngest nation in the world and will be the largest contributor to the global workforce. To take advantage of the demographic dividend and to have effective investments in its human capital, India needs to have a futuristic and holistic approach in its educational planning. The FICCI vision 2030 envisages a three-tier system of higher education. 
In tier 1, there will be the top 100 universities in the country focusing only on research. Government should provide generous grants on a competitive basis to facilitate quality researches in these universities. The next layer of universities would be teaching universities that facilitate latest models of teaching applying modern technology. The large number of the third layer universities includes ordinary universities and colleges to make education more inclusive. These colleges must be capable of reducing inequality in the access to education. They must be instrumental in facilitating the upward mobility of weaker sections and the under-privileged. The great networking possibilities in these colleges can empower the lesser privileged. Through these third type of institutions, the state should guarantee college education to all those who need it. India’s higher education sector is facing a real crisis of quality of teaching. It is time to enhance the value of teaching as a profession. It is desirable to have incubation centers for teachers. The state has to spend more for upgrading the quality of teaching. The caliber and strategies of university and college professors can greatly influence the capabilities and growth of the students at their disposal. Higher education policy should focus on social change and social transformation. There is any number of examples in the history of the world to demonstrate that social philosophers amongst educationists initiated great movements that transformed the whole world. The new policy should look at the society in its totality ensuring the ethics of sustainability. Our colleges and universities should be capable of turning out globally competent graduates who can appreciate cultural differences. Education should provide them the capabilities for critical thinking and problem-solving in a globalised environment. In a recent book, No Ordinary Disruption: The Four Global Forces Breaking All the Trends, the directors of McKinsey Global Institute explain the trends reshaping the world and why leaders must adjust to a new reality. 
1.4 Higher Education System: Impact on Indian Economy 1. Education In the recent past, India has made significant progress in the field of education. While literacy levels increased from 64.8% in 2001 to 73% in 2011, it is significantly below the world average of 84.3% as of 2010. Amongst the BRICS nations, literacy levels in China were 95.1% while Brazil attained 90.4%, South Africa 92.9% and Russia had around 100% literacy rates as per World Bank estimates of 2010. Further, the rise in literacy levels is not uniform in India. While the 
International Journal of Commerce and Management Research, Toll Free: 1800-1234-070 66 
IMS Business School Presents Doctoral Colloquium – 2017 ISBN: 978-93-85895-57-9 
male literacy rate is 80.9%, the female literacy rate is merely 64.7% according to Census 2011. A goal of the 12th Five Year Plan is to raise the overall literacy rate to over 80% and to reduce the gender gap in literacy to less than 10%. In order to improve the growth of the economy, the literacy rate must rise uniformly. According to UNDP report, 2014 estimates, India’s adults mean years of schooling at 4.4 years is well below the other emerging market economies such as China (7.5 years) and Brazil (7.2 years). A matter of particular concern is the steep dropout rate after the elementary level 
As indicated by the 12th Five Year Plan, the four major priorities with respect to education are access, equity, quality and governance. The problem of access is no more primary enrollment, but ensuring that the dropout rate is minimal, increasing secondary enrollment and ensuring regular attendance. There is a drastic difference in the male and female enrollment rate. Moreover, in order to improve inter- generational mobility, the government must ensure that families below the poverty line are provided equal opportunities. While the gaps in average enrolments between disadvantaged groups and the general population have decreased, there is still a considerably large gap in learning levels with historically disadvantaged and economically weaker children having significantly lower learning outcomes. Therefore in the future equity is a major concern. While the primary enrollment in India has increased dramatically, the literacy rates have not risen significantly. This is because the quality of education has not been up to the mark. Indicators of the quality of education are pupil to teacher ratio, physical space, textual materials, classroom processes, and academic support to the teachers, assessment procedures and community involvement. The pupil to teacher ratio in China stands at 16.8 while Brazil has a ratio of 21.3, significantly below that of India (35.2) as per WDI database 2014. Regular studies and analysis should be conducted in order to monitor the impact and quality of teaching. The education system in India can be categorized into 1. Pre- primary education (Until age 6), 2. Primary education (Ages 6 
– 11), 3. Secondary education (Ages 11 – 16), 4. Tertiary education (Ages 16 and beyond, includes university education), 5. Vocational education (training for specific trades), 6. Teacher education (Developing teaching skills) and 7. Adult education (Ages 18 and beyond developing skills, attitudes or values). 
2. Pre-primary Education The main purpose of pre-primary education is to prepare children physically, emotionally, socially and mentally for formal schooling and to prevent poor performance and early drop out. The Government of India had launched the Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) scheme in 1975. The Department of Women and Child Development has been implementing the scheme which seeks to provide healthcare facilities, supplementary nutritional support and to improve children’s communication and cognitive skills as a preparation for entry into primary school. The private sector also has a significant number of pre-primary institutions and with growing demand for pre-primary education in urban areas, the number of institutions is likely to go up. With a rising population and an increasing rate of young population, India is set to require a greater number of pre-primary institutions both in urban and rural areas. 
3. Secondary Education The government has initiated several schemes to encourage secondary education. However, the gross enrollment ratio (GER) of secondary school remains at 69% as of 2011, which is significantly below China (89%), Russia (95%) and South Africa (102%), according to World Development Indicator (WDI) report, 2014. As per the 12th Five Year Plan, the target is to raise the Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) at the secondary level to over 90%. 
The government had launched the Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA) scheme in FY10 in order to increase the enrollment ratio into secondary school. The scheme targets to achieve access to universal secondary education reduce gender, social and regional gaps and ensure good quality secondary education by the end of 12th Five Year Plan and by 2020 the scheme wishes to achieve universal retention. Under the Union Budget FY15, र 49.7 bn has been allocated for Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan. 
International Journal of Commerce and Management Research, Toll Free: 1800-1234-070 67 
IMS Business School Presents Doctoral Colloquium – 2017 ISBN: 978-93-85895-57-9 
The Information and Communication Technology in Schools (ICT) Scheme was launched in Dec 2004 to promote computer education. The scheme is expected to bring innovation in teaching learning process. National Scheme of Incentive to Girl Child for Secondary Education is launched with the objective to establish an enabling environment to reduce the drop-outs and to promote the enrolment of the girl child belonging mainly to SC/ST communities in secondary schools. National Means-cum-Merit Scholarship Scheme (NMMSS) was launched in May 2008 with the objective to award scholarships to meritorious students of economically weaker sections to arrest their drop out at class VIII and encourage them to continue the study at secondary stage. Other schemes include Financial Assistance for Appointment of Language Teachers, Vocationalisation of Secondary Education, and Inclusive Education for Disabled at Secondary Stage and Adolescence Education Program. Tertiary education India has one of the largest higher education systems in the world, and has been witnessing healthy growth in its number of institutions and enrollment. There exist 723 Universities, 37,204 colleges and 11,356 diploma-level institutions according to the Economic Survey FY14. Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) in higher education in India for 2012 is 25% while China has a GER of 27% and Russia of 76% in the same period according to WDI report, 2014. The Pupil-Teacher Ratio (PTR) in universities and colleges is 25.6 as per All India Survey on Higher Education released in 2013. It is evident that while states like Tamil Nadu have numerous Universities, the North Eastern regions lack good quality educational institutions. The government must strive to set up greater number of educational institutions in the North-East regions. In the field of higher education, the Government proposes to set up Jai Prakash Narayan National Centre for Excellence in Humanities in Madhya Pradesh. Also, five more IITs in Jammu, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Andhra Pradesh and Kerala will be set up, besides five IIMs in Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Bihar, Odisha and Maharashtra. 
4. Adult Education Saakshar Bharat Mission (SBM) was launched in 2009 to further promote and strengthen “Adult Education”. According to a report by UNESCO, the youth and the adult literacy rate in India is likely to be 90.2% and 80.5%, respectively by 2015. This reflects that although the government is taking active steps in educating children at the primary and secondary level it also needs to educate adults in order to achieve the literacy targets set in the 12th Five Year Plan. India has lower adult literacy rates than youth literacy rates. Therefore, the government needs to ensure that it invests more in adult education in the future. 
5. Teacher Education Competence of teachers and their motivation is crucial for improving the quality. At the national level, the National Council of Educational Research and Training prepares a host of modules for various teacher training courses and also undertakes specific programs for training of teachers and teacher educators and similarly at the state level in order to promote future growth, education and training of teachers is mandatory. The Central Government has started with best teacher awards, to encourage and facilitate efficient teachers and motivate youth to join the profession. With the Internet revolution, one can make videos of these talented teachers and show it to current as well as aspiring teachers, so that they can improve their teaching skills. Therefore the future of teacher education and training is online education. The Pandit Madam Mohan Malviya New Teachers Training Program is being launched for an initial sum of र 5 bn. 
International Journal of Commerce and Management Research, Toll Free: 1800-1234-070 68 
IMS Business School Presents Doctoral Colloquium – 2017 ISBN: 978-93-85895-57-9 
India faces a huge challenge to fund its rapidly growing higher education sector. As per D&B’s estimates, public expenditure in education is expected to increase to 4.2% of GDP by FY20, compared with 3.3% (BE) of GDP in FY14. In order to help India’s education sector to develop more rapidly, private expenditure is set to increase during the current decade. The likely scenario in the future will be a lowering of current licensing and regulatory restrictions to ease the barriers of entry for private institutions. India’s goals for the next several years could revolutionize the education sector and will help train individuals ready to enter the workforce. This influx of skilled workers in both the service and industrial sector is expected to contribute to the growing GDP. 
4. Systemic reform and legislative environment 
 There are opportunities for strategic engagement and capacity building in higher education leadership and management at the state level, in preparation for the implementation of the new regulatory system under the RUSA reform programme. Summary: Future opportunities & recommendations 37  2014 British Council. All rights reserved. 42 Re-imagine: India-UK cultural relations in the 21st century’, British Council, 2013  There are opportunities for India-UK collaboration at state and national levels on areas of systemic reform, including quality assurance, international credit recognition, and unified national qualifications framework. There may emerge opportunities for larger scale cooperation at state level, which may require consortia-style approaches 
International Journal of Commerce and Management Research, Toll Free: 1800-1234-070 69 
2. Summary Future Opportunities & Recommendations The interview data and the extensive reforms in higher education in India reveal a system undergoing considerable transformation. There is a sense of urgency in policy makers, institution leaders and faculty to expand the system at a fast enough pace to meet the surge in demand, while increasing quality and ensuring equitable access. There is a great deal of caution about the way reforms will unfold; progress is likely to follow an unpredictable course. The federal government is enabling states and institutions more autonomy to drive through reforms, which is creating greater potential for international engagement. Indian institutions are seeking more international collaboration on their terms and which will address their challenges. 
3. Strategic approach 
 For the UK sector as a whole, establish a deeper, broader and more diverse engagement with India in higher education. 
 The expansion and reform of higher education in India will be driven by the states. The increasing devolution of authority and budgets will probably mean that the significant opportunities for institutional partnering and large-scale, system-wide, multidimensional cooperation will emerge at state level. Some states will move faster than others: there will continue to be considerable variation in the ability and will of state governments to reform their higher education sectors. Therefore, strategic partnerships with Indian institutions will need to be highly selective; UK institutions would benefit from being aware of new state plans and their implications and opportunities. The central government in India will continue to be highly influential in a strategic and regulatory capacity Systemic reform and legislative environment. 
5. Institutional engagement 
 There is a need to build stronger relationships and increase mutual understanding in higher education by increasing support and participation in platforms (conferences, workshops, seminars) which enable debate and dialogue between Indian and UK leaders and academics on issues affecting higher education. In summary, there is expanding scope and opportunity for the UK higher education sector to engage with India and keenness within the Indian sector to partner with the UK through a broader, more diverse relationship. However, Indian institutions are looking globally for partners and other countries and their institutions are perceived to be more responsive in areas such as inward mobility to India. While the UK is still positioned strongly to be a key partner in India’s growth, it will need to increase its engagement if it is to play a significant part in the biggest opportunity for international higher education in the world in the coming decade. 
6. References 1. Higher Education in India: Issues, Concerns and New 
Directions http://www.ugc.ac.in/pub/heindia.pdf. 2. MHRD. Annual Report. Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of Secondary and Higher education. Government of India. New Delhi. 2006. 3. Jandhyala BG Tilak. Absence of Policy and Perspective in Higher Education. Economic and Political Weekly 2004; 39(21):2159-2164. (http://www.epw.org.in/epw/uploads/articles/7650.pdf) 4. PWC report on “India-Higher education system: 
Opportunities for Private Participation, 2012. 5. Higher education in India and Yashpal Committee 
recommendations http://www.jnu.ac.in/Yash_Pal_Committee.pdf. April 18, 2009, available on 25.1.2011.
﻿Higher Education, Innovation and Economic Development Bengt-Åke Lundvall Department of Business Studies Aalborg University, Denmark Paper to be presented at the World Bank’s Regional Bank Conference on Development Economics, Beijing, January 16-17, 2007. Abstract This paper links higher education to economic development through an analysis of how graduates contribute to innovation and learning and it draws policy implications for economic development. The starting points are two original contributions to the understanding of the role of higher education in relation to economic change (Nelson and Phelps 1965; Schultz 1979). On this basis we move ahead and referring to recent empirical research we demonstrate that graduates act both as innovators and equilibrators in what we call the learning economy. We end the analytical part concluding that investment in higher education may not give substantial rates of return in a technologically stagnant economy. Since the alternative to invest in higher education is to remain in stagnation forever, we focus our policy discussion on two questions. First, how to design higher education in such a way that it helps to break the vicious circle of stagnation and stagnating demand for graduates? Second, how to design a general strategy for vitalising national innovation systems that includes investment in higher education as important element? We recommend less developed countries to build universities more strongly rooted in the regional context – a model referred to in the paper is the US land grant college including its extension services. We also recommend deep reform of teaching methods establishing stronger emphasis on problem-based learning, where problems are taken from the domestic reality, as well as integration of local practical experience in study programs. Such reforms should be used to strengthen the third mission. Without reform and with focus on building universities as national centres of excellence the major outcome of investments may be further brain-drain toward the rich countries. We end arguing that reforms of higher education cannot alone break vicious circles. There is a need for ambitious national strategies aiming at vitalising the innovation system. Reforming higher education should be seen as a key element of such a strategy. 2 Bengt-Åke Lundvall Professor at Department of Business Studies Aalborg University, Denmark E-mail address: bal@business.aau.dk Higher Education, Innovation and Economic Development It is absurd to think that we can derive the contour lines of our phenomena from our statistical material only. All we could ever prove from it is that no regular contour lines exist....... We cannot stress this point sufficiently. General history (social, political and cultural), economic history and industrial history are not only indispensable, but really the most important contributors to the understanding of our problem. All other materials and methods, statistical and theoretical, are only subservient to them and worthless without them. (Schumpeter 1939) Introduction1 In the US, the richest country in the world, more than 90% of a cohort joins higher education. In Burkina Faso, one of the poorest countries in the world, only one out of hundred young people gets access to higher education. Does it follow that Burkina Faso would get better off by investing more in higher education? Or is it the other way around that the low frequency of education reflects the extreme poverty in the country? As we shall see, bringing innovation and learning into the picture may help understanding the mechanisms at play. 1 While working on this paper I have benefited from interaction with Judith Sutz, Edward Lorenz, Rene Nesgaard Nielsen, Keynor Ruiz, Mammo Muchie and Claes Brundenius. Most important have been critical and constructive comments from Shulin Gu. But, of course, I take full responsibility for the draft as it stands now. Some critical reader may note that most of the empirical material comes from Denmark/Europe while an attempt is made to deraw conclusions for less developed countries. To some degree this reflects that the kind of data used are not acessible for the less developed part of the world. But it also reflects my background and my use of data-rich Denmark as laboratory. 3 Graduates2 normally have a higher salary than non-graduates and this is by economists taken as an expression for higher (marginal) productivity. Why are graduates more productive than nongraduates? What functions can a graduate execute better than non-graduates? What competences attained in the education system make the graduate more efficient? Which are the competences required in the current era of rapid change? Are the required competences the same in a poor country as in a rich country? What are the implications for the organisation and teaching methods of higher education? Again, bringing innovation and learning into the picture helps understanding the mechanisms at play. This paper introduces new perspectives on higher education by relating it to innovation and learning and draws some preliminary policy conclusions for developed and less developed countries. But the specificity of the recommendations is limited and they are so for good reasons. One reason is that we know far too little about what graduates actually contribute to economy and society in less developed countries and much more research is needed on this topic. There is a need to open up the ‘black box’ inside which graduates use their skills and competences. Here we can only offer a first glimpse. The other reason is that both the challenges and the required solutions differ widely across the world. While almost all countries in the South and East have introduced ‘universities’ inspired by western models the context in which they operate are fundamentally different and so is the form and content of what goes under the label ‘university’ (Altbach 1989; Martin and Etzkowitz 2000). Such differences may reflect the income level. But the size of the country matters and so does the 2 In this paper, to simplify, we will refer to the sites of higher education as ‘universities’ and to those that leave the system with full education as ‘graduates’. We do so well aware that there are forms of higher education, including professional schools without connection to research activities, where this terminology may be misleading. 4 combination of history and geography. The colonial history of the Latin American, Asian and African countries has put its stamp on how higher education is organised on these continents. To give full justice to such diversity and complexity is of course not possible in a brief paper. To design adequate policy there is a need to combine general principles and insights with a deep and thorough analysis of the specific higher education system and its insertion in the national innovation system. While statistics showing numbers of graduates distributed on disciplines may be of some relevance it is necessary to dig much deeper into the complex reality hidden behind such figures (cf. the introductory methodological advice stemming from Schumpeter). Graduates as equilibrators and innovators In this section we will present models and empirical analyses that give general insight in the roles that graduates play in the economy. We start by two classical contributions and move on to bring innovation and learning centrally into the analysis. Two attempts to explain why higher education contributes to economic growth Policy makers with responsibility for higher education need to find arguments to convince ministries of finance to use scarce public money for higher education. The most usual approach has been to look for social rates of return higher than private rates of return. That kind of analysis has sometimes shown results that support investment in higher education but not always.3 The problem with this approach is not only that it neglects social, cultural and health benefits not reflected in wage differences: It is highly questionable if the basic assumptions that lie behind the analysis (that agents are optimising and that wages are equal to marginal productivity) are consistent with the fact 3 Pritchett (2001), using aggregate data for national economies, comes out with very negative results in this respect showing that investment in education, in general, has no positive effect on economic growth – in some national cases he even finds a negative impact. But he also refers to a few studies showing that the impact of the quality of education has a major impact on growth. We will return to the ‘quality issue’ later on in this paper. 5 that we live in a rapidly changing world characterised by disequilibria and radical fundamental uncertainty. And as argued below disequilibria and uncertainty are key factors when it comes to determine the usefulness of graduates in the economy. Compared to the numerous attempts to calculate rates of return few economists have asked the more down to earth question: Why and through what mechanisms do highly educated people contribute more to the economy than those with little education? Here we will take as our starting point two exceptional and important contributions that we will use as building blocks for our analysis one by Nelson and Phelps (1965) and the other by Schultz (1979). Nelson and Phelps (1965) present a simple growth model where people with higher education contribute to economic growth through two mechanisms. First they are able to pursue regular activities more efficiently than the average worker. Second, and here is the new insight brought by the paper, they are more competent when it comes to exploit new technical opportunities in the economy. To support their second assumption the authors refer to empirical data showing that highly educated farmers introduce new methods before and with better results than the average farmer. The conclusion from the analysis is that the marginal productivity of the highly educated will reflect the rate of technical change (exogenously given in the model). In other words the rate of return on investment in higher education will be positively correlated with the rate of technical progress. In a stationary economy we would expect the rate of return to be low while we would expect it to be high in an economy characterised by rapid technical change. In the light of this model we might expect the impact on economic growth from expanding higher education in Burkina Faso to remain limited as long as its technology base remains stagnant. On the other hand, for a less developed economy that successfully has entered a trajectory of catching-up, the contribution of higher 6 education would be high. High national rates of unemployment among graduates in certain poor countries (World Bank 2002 quotes graduate unemployment rates of 35% in Sri Lanka and 22% in Nigeria) may be seen as reflecting economies where there is little technical progress. A general conclusion is that the role of higher education needs to be assessed in the wider context of the national innovation system and that higher education policy needs to be coordinated with a wider set of innovation policies. Schultz (1979) follows a similar line of thought but takes the reasoning some steps further. The title ‘The value of the ability to deal with disequilibria’ – as well as the reasoning is intriguing, not least since it comes from an economist belonging to the Chicago-tradition within economics (Backhouse 2004). The empirical evidence used as background for the discussion is similar to that used in the Nelson-Phelps paper – it refers to farming in India and more specifically to the fact that while farmers with education were significantly more productive than average in regions where the green revolution took place, this was not the case where methods of farming remained unchanged. Schultz interprets these and other examples from agriculture and small firms as reflecting that education makes individuals better prepared to ‘deal with disequilibria’. When the individual is exposed to change in terms of new technological opportunities he/she will be more or less competent in finding a solution and it is assumed that one major impact of education is to enhance this competence which Schultz refers to as ‘entrepreneurial’. He makes the interesting observation that stationary economies are closer to general equilibrium than dynamic ones. Again, we would expect the contribution to economic growth from investment in higher education to be modest in a stationary economy and high in an economy with a high rate of technical and organisational change. We believe that these two contributions are highly relevant for understanding the role of higher education in the current era and we use them as building blocks for the analysis. But we will extend 7 the analytical perspective through a double change of focus (see box 1). In the two models graduates operate mainly as equilibrators. First, we will demonstrate that graduates contribute to economic growth also by being innovators. Second, we will demonstrate that in order to understand the real challenges for higher education it is necessary to take into account that agents learn by doing, using and interacting. We take into account that graduates when dealing with disequilibria and acting as innovators become more competent in the process of doing so. This is fundamental since, we will argue, in the current era learning is the most important of all economic activities. We still subscribe to the statement in Lundvall (1992) that ‘knowledge is the most important resource and consequently learning the most important process in the economy’. And we see the neglect of ‘learning as competence building’ as the singular most fundamental weakness of standard economics. Box 1: A double shift in analytical focus Learning refers to people and organisations becoming more competent in making decisions but also to people becoming more skilful in what they do. Individuals as well as organisations may learn through problem solving in connection with regular economic activities. Learning results in explicit knowledge about the world as well as in tacit knowledge about how to do things. Innovation refers to the process of introducing new ideas into the market sphere. Ideas may be new for the whole world but they may also be new locally for a country or for an organisation. Innovation is an interactive process with feedbacks from users and early adopters. At the core of the current innovation process is collective entrepreneurship – several agents interacting and working together to introduce change. While it is important to understand allocation as efficient use of existing resource it is equally important to understand how new resources appear. While it is important to understand the choices made by economic agents in the context of what we call the learning economy, it is even more important to understand how agents learn and become more competent in everyday economic life. The concept ‘innovation system’ is used to analyse the adequacy of the institutional set-up of an economy with focus upon innovation and learning rather than allocation and rational choice. The diagram below illustrates that learning as well as innovation, in principle, may be analysed in analytical frameworks closer to the standard neoclassical economics. It is possible (but not logically satisfactory) to apply the principles of rational choice to the analysis of innovation. It may, for instance, be assumed that ‘management of innovation’ is aiming at funds getting allocated to alternative R&D-projects according to the private rate of return, taking into account the risk that the projects do not succeed.4 Allocation Innovation Rational choice Standard neoclassical Management of innovation 8 Learning Austrian economics Innovation systems Austrian economics (Hayek and Kirzner) share with neoclassical economics focus on allocation of scarce resources. But they present the market as a dynamic learning process where the allocation of scarce commodities is brought closer to the ideal of general equilibrium without ever finding this state.5 The graduate as innovator – some results from empirical analysis In a series of Ph.D.-dissertations organised at Department of Business Studies, Aalborg University, different aspects of the role of higher education in processes of innovation have been analysed (Drejer 1999, Vinding 2002, Dahl 2004, Pedersen 2005, Nielsen 2007). Access to survey data for a big number of firms combined with detailed register data on employee characteristics for the surveyed firms have made it possible to get new insights in this field (Lundvall 2002a; Nielsen 2006). One interesting result is that the positive effect on the propensity to innovate (here measured as a positive response to the question if the firm has introduced a new product in a three year period) of having of employees with a graduate degree is especially strong in small and medium-sized firms operating in low and medium technology sectors (Lund Vinding 2004). Our interpretation is that in such, often family owned, firms there is a cultural resistance toward hiring graduates creating a gap between what is required and what is actually achieved in terms of personnel. We base this interpretation on the additional result that, after controlling for size, sector and other relevant variables, the independent family-owned firms are significantly less innovative than firms belonging to a Danish or foreign industrial group (Jensen et al 2007). In a still unpublished Ph.D.-thesis the role of graduates in small firm innovation has been analysed in a rigorous way. The analysis is focused upon small Danish firms originally without academic personnel. It studies the innovation performance in period t+1 distinguishing firms that hire a first graduate in period t from the rest. The analysis demonstrates that – taking into account a series of 9 relevant control variables – the first-time hiring of a graduate with an engineering background has a significant positive impact on the propensity to introduce a new product (Nielsen 2006). The analysis goes one step further asking if innovation in period t triggers a demand for skills in period t+1 – this is what we might expect from the analysis of Schultz since an innovation would establish disequilibria within the organisation. Here the result is that there is no significant effect on the hiring of graduates from technical innovation. But the analysis shows that firms that engage in organisational change in period t have a higher propensity to hire graduates with a non-engineering background in period t+1. Higher education produces both equilibrators and innovators This is still work in progress based upon Danish data. But potentially it has important direct and indirect implications for higher education. First, when designing higher education we should take into account that graduates operate both as innovators and as equilibrators. The results indicate that engineering graduates are more active as innovators while management and social science graduates have a bigger role as equilibrators. Second, there is a need to consider how well teaching programs prepare students for these respective roles. Below we will argue that traditional teaching modes do not contribute to the competences necessary to fulfil these roles and that there is a lot to gain from changing the methods of teaching in the direction of problem based learning using theory and analytical tools to analyse problems taken from the real world. Third, we find strong evidence that business organisations where the capability to innovate would benefit from hiring graduates do not hire for institutional reasons. There are barriers at the microlevel operating both on the supply and the demand side that result in a lower innovation capacity for the innovation system as a whole. Owners of small family-dominated companies are reluctant to 10 hire what they see as alien academics while graduates may be most attracted to environments where they can interact with other graduates Together these mechanisms establish high introduction thresholds for first time hiring of academic personnel. This last observation may be of special relevance for less developed countries where the distance from the academic world to the world of industry is big. The result may be a vicious circle reproducing stagnant technical change. The low demand for graduates in the private reflects cultural barriers that restrict the hiring of graduates. The absence of graduates, in its turn reduces the innovative capability of firms leaving industry in a stagnant mode where the demand for graduates remains modest. We will argue that this has implications for how the university should connect its research and higher education efforts in the local environment. It also implies that there may be a need for government initiatives to stimulate demand for ‘first graduate hired’ in the firm. In situations with high unemployment among graduates the positive socio-economic net effects of time-limited subsidies may be substantial. The alternative, which seems to be the case in several less developed countries, where the public sector tries to absorb graduate unemployment does not have any positive effect on the innovative capacity of the economy. Finally, the distinction between graduates as equilibrators and innovators may be useful as illustration of the importance of diversity as a basis for understanding the stability and growth of national innovation systems. Peter Allen (1988) presented a case story related to fishery in Canada where he found that the system was sustainable and efficient only because there were two types of fishermen. He called them respectively Cartesians and Stochasts. The Cartesians used rational calculation including all kinds of secondary information based on the experiments made by stochasts who were always on the outlook for new fishery areas. 11 It would be interesting to follow up on Schultz analysis and analyse different economies as populated by the two kinds of entrepreneurs – innovators (Stochasts) and equilibrators (Cartesians) – and to analyse implications for higher education system. The actual mix in the economy may explain the kind of economic dynamics that characterises a specific innovation system. The successful catching-up witnessed first in Japan and later in Korea and Taiwan had a strong emphasis on engineering skills used to absorb international technology through technological learning. For these countries, as they move closer to the technology frontier, it might be a major challenge to reform higher education so that it gives graduates stronger competence as innovators. A more indirect lesson is that higher education should aim at a diversified output and that ambitious attempts to standardise the national higher education system should be reined in. The most successful innovation process might typically involve collaboration among engineers and scientists with different approaches to problem solving. In Denmark there are two universities that educate most of civil engineers and they offer two different forms of education. One is more traditional based upon learning through lectures and course work (Denmark’s Technical University) while the other makes much more use of problem based learning (Aalborg University). We believe that the resulting diversity in approaches to problem solving among Danish engineers may enrich the innovation system. We see one of the most fundamental strengths of the US higher education system in its diversity spanning from arts colleges and land universities to research universities, both private and public. Higher education in the learning economy In this section we take into account that agents involved in innovation and in coping with disequilibria learn and become more competent in the process. 12 The learning economy as a response to the acceleration in change In various contexts we have introduced an interpretation of what actually takes place in the economy over the last decades under the heading ‘the learning economy’ (Lundvall and Johnson 1994). The intention is to mark a distinction from the more generally used term ‘the knowledgebased economy’. The learning economy concept signals that the most important trend shift is not the more intensive use of knowledge in the economy but rather that knowledge becomes obsolete more rapidly than before; therefore it is imperative that firms engage in organizational learning and that workers constantly attain new competencies.6 The speed-up of change can be illustrated by the fact that it is claimed that half of the skills that a computer engineer has obtained during his education will have become obsolete one year after the exam has been passed, while the ‘halving period’ for other wage earners with higher education is estimated to be eight years (Ministry of Education 1997, p. 56). Returning to the contribution by Nelson and Phelps we would assume that the relative demand for higher education would increase as the rate of change accelerates. One of the very clear outcomes of OECD’s Jobs Study was that in the period after 1985 this was the case in almost all OECDcountries – in all OECD-countries we found that either income differences or employment opportunities became more unequal between those with higher education and those without. A different way to characterise the learning economy is that it is an economy where the demand both for innovators and equilibrators is increased and since those with a higher education are more successful in these roles the relative position of employees with higher education is strengthened. The transition to a learning economy confronts individuals and organisations with new demands and it has important implications for higher education. The most obvious is that the education system needs to give attention to enhancing the learning capacity of the students. This does not necessarily conflict with teaching specific and complex bodies of theory or with the use of 13 specialised tools. But it implies that the way teachers teach and the way students learn becomes crucial. A second major implication is that higher education institutions need to be ready to support continuous and life-long learning for academics. Especially in fast moving fields of knowledge there is a need to give regular and frequent opportunities for experts to renew their professional knowledge. Finally, rapid change in science and technology and the need to move quickly from invention to innovation presents a strong argument for keeping a reasonably close connection between the two basic functions of universities: education and research. Teachers who have little or obsolete knowledge about what is going on in current research are not helpful when it comes to give students useful insights in dynamic knowledge fields. These are implications for fast-changing rich societies with strong emphasis on innovation and learning. What about less developed countries? In the next session we will introduce some fresh European data that show that workplace learning takes place differently in different European countries. Some of these differences reflect different levels of economic development and the analysis of these differences gives us hints on how to link higher education and learning to economic development. How Europe’s economies learn Lorenz and Valeyre (2006) have developed a highly original and informative EU-wide mapping of the adoption of different types of work organisation with focus on learning opportunities and employees’ discretion in organising their work.7 Cluster analysis is used to identify four different systems of work organisation: Discretionary learning (DL). 14 Lean. Taylorist. Traditional forms. Two of these, the discretionary learning and lean forms, are characterised by high levels of learning and problem solving in work. The principal difference between the discretionary learning and the lean clusters is the relatively high levels of discretion or autonomy in work exercised by employees grouped in the former. Over 85 percent of the employees grouped in the DL-cluster affirm that they have control over their work pace and work methods whereas only slightly over 50 percent of the employees grouped in the lean cluster affirm this. Task complexity is also higher in the discretionary learning cluster than in the lean cluster. Referring back, we might say that all those who work in the two learning modes operate as equilibrators – they are regularly confronted with solving problems of reallocating resources as a response to change imposed upon them. But in the discretionary learning cluster we would also find ‘innovators’ who, confronted with new types of problems, would develop new methods to solve them. Discretionary learning thus refers to work settings where a lot of responsibility is allocated to the employee who is expected to solve problems on his or her own. Business services are a typical example where many jobs involve a continuous confrontation with new and complex problems. Although some of the tasks take place in a team, teamwork is not seen as imposing narrow constraints on the work. Employees operating in these modes are constantly confronted with ‘disequilibria’ and as they cope with those they learn and become more competent. But they also experience that some of their earlier insights and skills become obsolete. 15 Table 1: National Differences in Organisational Models (percent of em ployees by organisational class) Discretionary learning Lean production learning Taylorist organisation Simple organisation North Netherlands 64,0 17,2 5,3 13,5 Denmark 60,0 21,9 6,8 11,3 Sweden 52,6 18,5 7,1 21,7 Finland 47,8 27,6 12,5 12,1 Austria 47,5 21,5 13,1 18,0 Centre Germany 44,3 19,6 14,3 21,9 Luxemb. 42,8 25,4 11,9 20,0 Belgium 38,9 25,1 13,9 22,1 France 38,0 33,3 11,1 17,7 West United Kingdom 34,8 40,6 10,9 13,7 Ireland 24,0 37,8 20,7 17,6 South Italy 30,0 23,6 20,9 25,4 Portugal 26,1 28,1 23,0 22,8 Spain 20,1 38,8 18,5 22,5 Greece 18,7 25,6 28,0 27,7 EU-15 39,1 28,2 13,6 19,1 Source : Adapted version based on Lorenz and Valeyre (2006) Lean production also involves problem solving and learning but here the problems appear to be more narrowly defined and the set of possible solutions less broad. The work is highly constrained and this points to a more structured or bureaucratic style of organisational learning that corresponds rather closely to the characteristics of the Japanese or ‘lean production’ model. The other two clusters are characterised by relatively low levels of learning and problem solving. In the traditional cluster, learning and task complexity is the lowest among the four types of work organisation, while at the same time constraints on work rate are relatively low. This class groups traditional forms of work organisation where methods are for the most part informal and noncodified. 16 Table 1 shows that people working in different national systems of innovation and competence building have very different access to workplace learning. The DL forms of work organisation are most widely diffused in the Netherlands, the Nordic countries and to a lesser extent in Germany and Austria, while they are little diffused in Ireland and the southern European nations. The lean model is most in evidence in the UK, Ireland, and Spain and to a lesser extent in France, while it is little developed in the Nordic countries or in Germany, Austria and the Netherlands. The taylorist forms are more present in Portugal, Spain, Greece and Italy, while the traditional forms are similarly more in evidence in these four southern European nations as well as in Germany, Belgium and Luxembourg.8 We find that the lower the income level, the bigger the proportion of the workforce that work in either Simple or Taylorist organizations. The richer the country the more workers are employed in learning contexts.9 One interesting perspective raised by these data is that economic development may be defined and analysed as a transformation of working life. Historically we have seen, first, a transformation from simple to taylorist organisation of work as farmers are absorbed by factory work. Later on, an increasing share of the workforce enter into more flexible forms – Lean or Discretionary Learning and in some current high income the majority of workers work in Discretionary Learning workplaces. One important lesson is that while codified knowledge and advanced science become more important as the economy develops, there is simultaneously an increase in demand for less structured knowledge produced by organisational learning (Jensen et al 2007). The North-South pattern observed in Europe supports the assumption that industry’s capacity to absorb graduates as employees is higher in rich countries than in less developed countries. The pattern also indicates that employees in countries at the technological front learn more than those in poor countries. In general the problem of growing social, international and regional inequality is 17 fundamental for how higher education systems should be designed in the globalising learning economy. There are several different mechanisms at play and therefore we will treat this set of problems in a separate section below. Education and training for learning organisations Since the discretionary learning forms of work organisation depend on the capacity of employees to undertake complex problem-solving tasks in relatively unconstrained or ‘organic’ work settings, it can be expected that nations with a high frequency of these forms will have made substantial investments in the development of the knowledge and skills of their labour forces. Investments in education and training take various forms and in what follows we compare tertiary or third-level education with the continuing vocational training offered by enterprises both through external and internal courses. Tertiary education develops both problem-solving skills and formal and transferable technical and scientific skills. A major goal of most EU nations over the last two to three decades has been both to increase the share of their populations with third-level education, and more specifically to increase the number of graduates qualified in science and engineering. While most of the qualifications acquired through third-level education will be relatively general and hence transferable on the labour market, the qualifications an employee acquires though continuing vocational training will be more firm specific. Some of this training will be designed to renew employees’ technical skills and knowledge in order to respond to the firm’s requirements in terms of on-going product and process innovation. Other parts of continuing vocational training, notably the provision of in-house courses, will be more organisationally focused and designed to develop employee competence in the firm-specific routines and operating procedures that are required for daily production activities. This latter kind 18 of vocational training will be highly complementary to the more informal forms of learning that occur on-the-job, as employees seek solutions to the problems they confront in their daily work. Figure 3 shows the correlations between the frequency of the DL forms and two of the four measures of human resources for innovation used in Trendchart’s innovation benchmarking exercise: the proportion of the population with third-level education and the number of science and engineering graduate since 1993 as a percentage of the population aged 20-29 years in 2000. The results show a positive correlation (R-squared = .26) between the DL forms and the percent of the population with third level education, and no discernible correlation between the DL forms and the measure of the importance of new science and engineering graduates. 19 Figure 3 Formal education and discretionary learning Discretionary learning and third-level education 0 6g ninraely ranoitercsid05AT LU 04UK % 03IT PT 02EL 10 15 20 25 30 35 % third-level education DL Fitted values R-squared = .26 Discretional learning and new S&E graduates NL 0 6g ninaely ranoitercsid0504UK Figure 4 shows that there are fairly strong positive correlations (R-squared = .75 and .52 respectively) between the frequency of the discretionary learning form and two measures of firms’ investments in continuing vocational training: the percentage of all firms offering such training and the participants in continuing vocational education as a percent of employees in all enterprises. The AT LU DE % 03IT PT 02EL 0 5 new S&E 10 graduates 15 20 DL Fitted values R-squared = .0 20 BE ES FR ES SE DK DE NL DK BE FI SE FI FR results suggest that these forms of firm-specific training are key complementary resources in the development of the firm’s capacity for knowledge exploration and innovation.10 Figure 4 Enterprise continuing vocational training and discretionary learning Discretional learning and firm vocational training 0 6g ninraely ranoitercsid0504UK % 03IT PT 02EL ES 0 20 40 60 80 % vocational training DL Fitted values R-squared = .75 Discretional learning and employee vocational training 06g ninraely ranoitercsid0504UK Figure 4 also points to a north/south divide within Europe. The four less technologically developed southern nations are characterised both by low levels of enterprise continuing vocational training AT % 03IT PT 02EL ES 10 20 30 40 50 60 % participation in vocational training DL Fitted values R-squared = .52 21 DE LU BE BE NL LU FR FI DE DK FR FI AT NL SE SE D and by low use of discretionary learning, while the more developed northern and central European nations are characterised by relatively high levels of vocational training and by high level use of the discretionary learning forms. When interpreting the data presented here, it is important to note that much of the continuing vocational training may be directed toward graduates. In Lundvall (2002) we find a strong Matthews’s effect in the distribution of training opportunities in Danish firms. The higher echelons with higher education were offered such opportunities much more frequently than were workers with short formal education. These results do not imply that third-level education contributes little to firms’ innovative performance. Rather, the point is that, the bottleneck for constructing learning organisations in a less developed economy would appear to be at the level of firm-specific vocational training and not at the level of formal third-level education. Portugal, Spain, Italy and Greece, all of which have made important strides in increasing the number of science and engineering graduates, stand out for their low levels of investment in continuing vocational training and for ranking the lowest on the discretionary learning scale. Again, the analysis indicates that investing in higher education will be much less efficient if the economy does not establish the prerequisites for establishing learning dynamics and this includes continuous efforts to upgrade competences at the firm level. In a forthcoming Ph.D. dissertation Keynor Ruiz (2007) on the basis of a series of case studies reveals serious weaknesses of labour market institutions in Costa Rica when it comes to support organisational learning inside firms. Inequality and learning in economic development In the next table mapping international differences in the frequency of discretionary learning we make a distinction between what we call ‘managers’ and ‘worker’. Actually the class of managers 22 include not only top managers but also middle managers and professionals, including technicians, while the worker category includes workers with and without professional training as well as clerks. The table shows that the higher the employees are in the professional hierarchy the higher the probability that they are engaged in discretionary learning. This is true for all the countries. What is more interesting is that we find a strong indication of different learning modes in different countries. In the most developed economies (with the exception of France and the UK) we find that the inequality in the distribution of learning opportunities is moderate while they are very substantial in the less developed south. For instance, the proportion of the management class engaged in discretionary learning in Portugal is almost as high as in Finland (62% in Finland and 59% in Portugal), but the proportion of workers engaged in discretionary learning is much higher in Finland (38.2% versus 18.2%). Finland is among the highest in income as in innovation activities while we find Portugal at the other extreme on both accounts. This pattern indicates that a movement toward a learning economy is one where inequality in learning opportunities is reduced. The countries at the top of table are countries where income inequality is low and they are highly successful in adapting to the changes impose upon them by new technologies and new forms of more intense and global competition. So while it might be true that higher education fosters people who are successful as equilibrators and innovators it is when those people interact with a broader segments of the workforce in promoting or coping with change that the innovation system as a whole turns out to be most efficient. 23 Table 1: National Differences in Organisational Models (percent of employees by organisational class) 
Discretionary learning* Share of managers in discretionary learning Share of workers in discretionary learning Share of workers in discretionary learning Learning Inequality index** Learning Inequality index** Learning Inequality index** 
North Netherlands 64,0 81.6 51.1 160.0 Denmark 60,0 85.0 56.2 151.2 Sweden 52,6 76.4 38.2 200.0 Finland 47,8 62.0 38.5 161.0 Austria 47,5 74.1 44.6 166.1 Centre Germany 44,3 65.4 36.8 177.8 Luxemb. 42,8 70.3 33.1 212.4 Belgium 38,9 65.7 30.8 213.3 France 38,0 66.5 25.4 261.8 West UK 34,8 58.9 20.1 293.0 Ireland 24,0 46.7 16.4 284.8 South Italy 30,0 63.7 20.8 306.8 Portugal 26,1 59.0 18.2 324.2 Spain 20,1 52.4 19.1 274.3 Greece 18,7 40.4 17.0 237.6 EU-15 39,1 *After correction for job structure and sector composition. **The index is constructed by dividing the share among ‘managers’ engaged in discretionary learning with the share of workers engaged in discretionary learning. I fthe share was the same the index woul be =100. For the design of higher education systems in less developed countries, and also for countries in the south of Europe, these observations raise an issue of how education programs can be designed in such a way that the social distance in working life between ‘management’ and ‘workers’ does not become too big. The experience of the Nordic countries, always appearing at the top of global competitiveness assessments together with the US, also demonstrates that public policies reducing 24 income inequality may actually promote innovation and growth through its positive effect on the participation in learning and change. Reflections on public policy for higher education In this section we present some ideas about public policy in relation to higher education based upon our analysis. It is obvious that any attempt to introduce change needs to be based upon broad participation of civil society and not least engage change agents within the academic community. Universities are conservative institutions and in extreme cases it might be considered to build new ones rather than reforming the old ones. A pessimistic conclusion? Not so many years ago the World Bank argued against investment in higher education in Africa recommending governments to focus their efforts on primary and secondary education. This recommendation was based on the observed low rates of return on the investments (Samoff and Carrol 2004). Our analysis may be interpreted as leading to equally pessimistic policy implications. We have argued that in poor economies with little technical progress and little economic change the demand for graduates will remain low. But this is not the conclusion we will draw. As pointed out in more recent World Bank documents investments in higher education should not be assessed exclusively on the basis of the contribution to economic growth (World Bank 2002). And, since there is now agreement that all countries should invest in higher education we are left with a different and more challenges question: How should higher education be organised so that it contributes to a take-off in terms of innovation and economic growth in a less developed economy? But there is a need to combine this with an even more fundamental change of perspective where the focus is moved from promoting supply to creating demand for educated workers. For each single 25 less developed economy there is a need to develop a strategy aiming at making the national innovation system more active and dynamic. With success, such a strategy would also establish stronger demand for higher education. This perspective requires that policies for higher education be seen as integral parts of a much broader set of policies aiming at promoting innovation in the economy. How to organise universities in a less developed economy? There are many problems for the policy maker responsible for higher education. Some problems have to do with funding, efficient administration and the quality of teachers and graduates. Here we will focus on one specific set of problems related to the high degree of separation of the higher education from the rest of society. We believe that shortening this distance is a key to getting positive results from investment in higher education in less developed economies. In many developing countries the prevailing ‘university models’ are the world leading USuniversities in the Boston and the San Francisco area, or possibly the universities in Cambridge or Oxford. The idea that each single university should become a world centre of excellence it attractive in the sense that it gives strong emphasis to quality and meritocracy in contrast to corrupt practises and mediocrity. But it is not all for the good. A very bad replica of the star universities may be detrimental to economic development. We believe that there is another US-model that could give more useful inspiration and this is the land university with its extension services. The first of these regional universities were established around 1860 with the direct purpose to contribute to regional development and they were supported by regional civil society and by the federal as well state and local authorities. In the 20th century they started to combine research and higher education with an active extension system for distributing useful knowledge to the region. The extension service was not only aimed at the business sector, including farmers, it also aimed at 26 giving education to housewives and adults in general. We think that universities of this kind may produce graduates that are better equipped to contribute to problem solving and innovation in less developed regions and countries than the standard research university. It may be combined with establishing one or more national universities that consciously try to link up with ‘global networks of excellence’. But it is obvious that establishing such elite universities always will result in ‘brain drain’ – at least as long as the domestic demand for advanced knowledge remains limited. For such universities it is therefore necessary to socialise students in such a way that they graduate with a certain pride of country and university brand to give them some roots in their home country. The national universities may be linked through collaborative network agreements to the regional universities and job descriptions for professors may include that they should serve at both in order to give regional universities updated knowledge about frontier research. Regional universities should be stimulated to develop advanced research in niches where they reveal strength or in areas where regional demand is strong. Such local forms of excellence should be rewarded on line with the excellence of the national university, Higher education should contribute to general competences One of the most important insights from innovation research is that the innovation process is interactive (Christensen and Lundvall 2005). Transforming a new idea into a marketable product involves teamwork and inter-organisational interaction with customers and knowledge institutions. In a context of accelerating change, general skills that support learning become increasingly important. What matters for the performance of a graduate is a combination of professional and specialised knowledge acquired through reading books and following lectures and a set of so called general 27 skills and especially the capacity to communicate, cooperate and interact with others. In a less developed economy such skills involve the ability to interact efficiently in a cultural environment quite different from the academic context. General competences are sometimes referred to as ‘personal’ and sometimes as ‘workplace skills’. This terminology is problematic since it gives the impression that they are something separate to be added on after the university training has been concluded. One way to make the transition to working life less painful for graduates is for universities to take responsibility for the formation of general skills. Danish survey data illustrates that there is a close connection between firms engaging in organisational change and learning and the demand for ‘social skills’. Table 4: Changes in task content for em ployees in the period 1993-95 for firm s that have m ade organisational changes (outside the parentheses), com pared with firm s that have not m ade organisational changes (in parentheses). More Less Unchanged No answer a. Independence of work 72,6 (37,1) 4,2 (2,7) 21,2 (56,3) 2,0 (3,8) b. Professional qualifications 56,4 (36,3) 7,5 (5,3) 33,3 (53,8) 2,8 (4,4) c. Routine character of tasks 5,6 (8,2) 41,8 (15,5) 45,0 (67,1) 7,7 (9,1) d. Co-operation with colleagues 59,1 (27,1) 5,8 (4,5) 31,8 (63,3) 3,2 (5,0) e. Co-operation with management 64,9 (28,6) 5,9 (4,2) 26,1 (62,2) 3,1 (4,9) 28 Source: Voxted 1999, DISKO-Survey, N=952 (981) Table 4 shows that there is stronger demand for professional skills in firms establishing new forms of organisation but the gap is much less regarding these than when it comes to general skills. All firms, but especially those that engage in organisational change, require from the experts they hire that they can communicate and collaborate internally and externally. This implies that the teaching at the universities needs to be adjusted in order to prepare the students for communicating and co-operation with other categories of workers and experts. The way students study and learn at university affects their social skills when they exit as graduates and so does the broader cultural context of the university. In the modern literature on learning this relates to the idea of learning as moving from the periphery to the centre of communities of practise. The idea of education as a process where you fill empty bottles the form of which is determined elsewhere is widely shared but it is inadequate (Guile2003). University education everywhere has inherited some forms of transmitting knowledge to students such as series of lectures, often in big crowded rooms referring to standard textbooks often based upon the reality of the US or the UK. We would argue that this method of learning is highly inefficient. One problem is the lack of relevance of the substance seen in relation to the concrete context and this problem is of course most dramatic in less developed countries. Research focused on domestic problems attempting to adopt research methods and tools to the local context may be helpful to develop more relevant teaching material. The second problem is that this traditional learning form does not prepare students to use the theory and methods in a real life context and neither does it replicate the kind of learning that is required in a future professional life. In professional life most learning takes place through problem solving, often in a context of collaboration with others with a different background. Problem-based learning 29 and combining theoretical work with periods of practical work is an obvious response to these problems. We believe that this consideration is especially important in less developed countries where universities tend to select a small group of the population among the elite to become the new elite. Elite education in narrowly defined disciplines may be detrimental to innovation even if it takes place at ‘centres of excellence’. Both the socialisation and the selection functions are important for what kind of scientists and engineers that are produced by the national system of higher education. The way students learn to become proficient in a specific discipline or profession is thus crucial for how they will function in their future functions. This also implies that we need a concept and indicators of ‘quality’ with several dimensions when we evaluate education outcomes. PISA-tests in mathematics, physics and language capabilities need to be combined with tests of ‘interactive capabilities’. A high level of the first type of capability is of limited value for innovation if the level for the second type is low. A principal task for higher education is to contribute to collective entrepreneurship – i.e. to general skills supporting an interaction with others resulting in innovation. Students’ activities should be at the core of the third mission When it comes to see university as a source of innovation focus is normally on specific organisations aiming at linking university research to business organisations. Often the focus is on efforts to establish science parks in physical proximity to universities or on engaging universities in patenting their research results.11 In contrast, I will argue that universities’ most important contribution to innovation remains their formation of graduates with a good problem-solving capacity. 30 The strong emphasis policy makers and university administrators put on as separate ‘third mission’ as compared to the much lower attention they give to reforming ‘ordinary education’ is highly problematic since it results in a neglect of the substantial gains that could be achieved by modernising the education system. Such educational reforms would have as a central aim to deepen and widen the network relationships between university and industry.12 The third mission and the market orientation of universities In recent years there has been a strong emphasis on reforming universities to take on what has been called ‘the third mission’. This has in the literature often been presented as synonymous with the idea that they should become more market-oriented (Etzkowitz and Leydesdorff 2000). Actually, the stronger market orientation should be kept separate from the idea of strengthening of ‘the third mission’. It is important to note that the concept of ‘the third mission’ goes back to 1914 when the extension service was added to other basic activities at Land Grant Colleges through the Congressional Smith-Lever Act in the US (Graham 1994). The extension services were/are not primarily profit-oriented and the principal aim was not to make money for universities. On the contrary, the establishment and set-up involve strong elements of civic service to serve the local society that supports the local university. A similar tradition of serving local societies and weak segments of the population can be found at universities in many of the Latin American countries (Arocena and Sutz 2005).13 31 Box 2: Three negative consequences of taking the market orientation of the university too far Closer university-industry interaction may stimulate innovation in the economy. Contract research for firms, informal consulting for firms and many other forms of collaboration may take place without seriously undermining the autonomy of the university, especially if it is built in an atmosphere of mutual understanding and respect and if the collaboration is transparent. Nonetheless, there are three major potential negative consequences of taking the market orientation of universities too far. First, installing intellectual property rights on outcomes of academic research cannot avoid having a negative effect on knowledge sharing within and outside the university and it undermines the academic ideal of open access to knowledge. Second, in the knowledge-based economy, it is critically important for society to have access to an institution that is credible when it comes to critically assess and validate ‘what is reasonably reliable knowledge’. There are, as I see it, no serious alternatives to universities when it comes to fulfil this function and making them highly dependent on markets makes them less reliable judges and witnesses. Third, as universities become simultaneously more international in their scope and more market oriented they will come under the scrutiny of WTO and European competition regulators. The long-term outcome of this might be that, since fundamental research and normal higher education cannot be clearly separated from their commercialised activities, public funding for these core activities may become classified as illegal subsidies of business activities. This would certainly undermine the very foundation of the knowledge-based society. In Lundvall (2002b) I have argued that to balance the need to get closer to the business sector with the need for a certain relative autonomy a diversification of the university activities with protected realms for ‘slow and deep research’ may be the only solution to the dilemmas facing universities. To argue that reluctance to transform universities into profit-oriented business organisations is to support an ‘ivory tower’ model is thus highly misleading. Actually, to engage universities in protecting and selling knowledge in the form of patents may be seen as building equally inaccessible ‘business towers’.14 The third mission and higher education To isolate students on campus for three to five years and exclusively expose them to university teaching for this period is not the best way to train students. Laboratory work and construed case material does not establish sufficient links between theory and practise. In most disciplines and professions students can learn from analysing problems outside university. Periods of fieldwork or practical work periods related to the object of study are useful in preparing students for a future career. Educational programs should be organised in such a way that students can contribute to the 32 third mission of the university and at the same time profit from it in terms of learning. Longer educations may be split up into parts with periods of practical activity in between. It is often neglected that the success of ‘third mission’ programs will reflect not only the supply side but also the demand side. For instance, firms without personnel with a higher education will not be prepared to/capable to interact with universities. Educating graduates in such a way that they find employment in industry is therefore a key also to strengthen university-industry collaboration. Below we illustrate this by combining labour market data with survey data on industry-university collaboration. Table 2: Share of firms that have strengthened their co-operation with knowledge institutions related to size of the business and amount of employees with higher education (HE) Percentage that have cooperated in connection with product development. 49 employees or less More than 49 employees HE>2 HE<2 All HE>2 HE<2 All Increase in co-operation 19 9 11 35 24 26 No increase in co-operation 81 91 89 65 76 74 Total 100 100 100 100 100 100 
N (%) 156 (16%) 827 827 (84%) (84%) 983 983 983 (100%) (100%) (100%) 142 142 142 142 (24%) (24%) (24%) (24%) 460 460 460 460 460 (76%) (76%) (76%) (76%) (76%) 602 602 602 602 602 602 (100%) (100%) (100%) (100%) (100%) (100%) Source: Nielsen 1999 
Table 2 shows that firms with employees with more than two employees with a higher education are more prone to collaborate with universities and other knowledge institutions than firms with less. 33 For small firms the probability of intensifying the co-operation with a science institution is twice as high when the business has more than two employees with higher education. One important way to increase the interest in firms to hire academic personnel and on this basis to collaborate with universities is to establish some kind of exchange already during the study period. As mentioned above, time limited marginal employment subsidies to private firms hiring graduates is a possible policy response. Promoting Excellence when knowledge attracts knowledge? One of the important consequences of the move toward a globalising learning economy is that inequality becomes a major problem at all levels. The globalising learning economy concentrates both knowledge and incomes at all levels as long as market mechanisms are given free play. This constitutes an inherent contradiction in the globalising learning economy since learning seems to be especially successful in contexts with small gaps in income and social status – cf. the data on discretionary learning in the Nordic countries. The new distribution problem calls for ‘a new new deal’ where focus is upon redistributing ‘learning opportunities’ and ‘learning capabilities’. It is therefore a major task for international organisations and national governments to find ways to stimulate such redistribution. One dimension of the growing inequality is the geographical concentration of wealth and knowledge. We have seen that the more knowledge is advanced the more new knowledge is created in a region through processes of learning and innovation. Within countries we also see similar patterns of growing regional gaps in knowledge and income. Knowledge used in the economy always has tacit elements that make it difficult to move it from one site to another. Since it is more expensive to produce new knowledge than it is to use it on a wider scale, certain locations will become very active in terms of innovation. It is easier to develop 34 complex new technology at a site located close to advanced knowledge institutions, sophisticated suppliers and customers than at a site without a strong knowledge infrastructure. In the learning economy the increasing mobility of people reinforces global as well as regional inequality. For individuals eager to advance in the learning economy it is rational to move to places where a lot of learning taking place. There might be other specific attractors for ‘the creative class’ (such as a high frequency of rock concerts or bars for homosexuals as found in the work by Richard Florida) but the most basic attractor is that there are already other creative people in the locality and there are ample learning opportunities in the area. Similar mechanisms are at work in the competition between higher education organisations. They are reinforced by public rankings making students and professors eager to join certain highly prestigious universities. Allocation mechanisms giving extra resources to those universities that publish most will contribute to the increase in the gap between the elite universities and the rest. In public policy there is certain ambivalence in relation to these phenomena. On the one hand most national ministries of education or science aim at establishing one or more ‘world class universities’. But on the other hand it is obvious that concentrating all education and research at very few universities would result in an extremely uneven regional distribution of knowledge and economic development. Especially for less developed countries it is highly problematic to allocate resources mainly to the most established universities with the most highly developed international connections. Many of these resources risk becoming part of the global drain in the direction of rich countries and multinational companies (Hoebink and Van der Zanden 2004). This is why one further reason why we propose that regionally anchored universities should be given a fair share of resources for research and education. Actually such universities may also be 35 more flexible when it comes to experiment with new forms such as problem-based learning methods and interdisciplinary research. Conclusions I am painfully aware of the fact that there are many difficult policy issues related to higher education that have not been given sufficient attention in this paper. Rather than listing those and analyse each separately I have tried to deepen our understanding of some general mechanisms that link higher education to economic development and tried as well to draw some policy implications on this basis. To get a fresh perspective, we have focused more on learning and innovation and less on rational choice and allocation of existing resources. We find that the major problem for higher education in many countries is a lack of domestic demand that reflects an incomplete and stagnating national innovation system. Therefore we have focused on reforms of the higher education system that might contribute to a building of a more complete and dynamic innovation system. Most of the reforms have aimed at shortening the distance between higher education and society to make the transfer from university to work less painful and at the same time to build new and more solid bridges between universities and industry. But higher education is only one part of the national innovation system. In order to break out of vicious circles there is a need for a comprehensive national strategy rooted in a strong common engagement to change. Such a strategy needs to be based upon a solid analysis of the national innovation system. Such a strategy needs to give much attention to human resources in general, not only higher education, but also including for instance labour market institutions. It also needs to include an industrial policy aiming at developing economic activities matching domestic competences but with positive learning curves. Studying innovation systems in Latin America, 36 Africa and Asia we have found little evidence, that market forces spontaneously will establish the necessary prerequisites for catching-up (Gammeltoft, Lundvall and Muchie 2003; Lundvall, Interakummerd and Lauridsen 2006). In this respect, developing countries have more to learn from Friedrich List and ‘The Other Canon’ than from Adam Smith (Reinert 1999). Actually, the poorest countries in Africa and elsewhere might not be able to break out of their vicious circles by any kind of intelligent technocratic effort – not even with substantial international aid. In these countries it might be necessary with social mobilisation from below that might result in a collective effort to engage in far-reaching social and political change. The history of my home country Denmark demonstrates that this can take place in a quite peaceful way. The radical transformation of Danish agriculture in the second half of the 19th century laid the foundation of a growing and successful economy (2005 Denmark was ranked as the world’s most competitive economy by the UK-magazine the Economist). A fundamental prerequisite for this transformation was the ideological mobilisation of the small farmers, the establishment of folk high schools that gave the farmers self-confidence and knowledge and the cooperative movement. Spiritual leadership is important: Without the active role played by the popular and charismatic priest Grundtvig the process might not have taken place at all. References Altbach, P.G. (1989), ‘Twisted roots: The western impact on Asian Higher education’, Higher Education, 18, pp. 9-29. Arocena, R. and Sutz, J. (2005), Latin American universities: From an original revolution to an uncertain transition’, Higher Education, vol. 50, pp. 573-592. Arrow, K. J. (1973), ‘Higher Education as a Filter’, Journal of Public Economics 2: 193-216. Backhouse, R.E. (2004), ‘The rise of free-market economics: economists and the rule of the state since 1970’, working paper, University of Birmingham. Christensen, J. L. and Lundvall, B.-Å. (eds.) (2004), Product Innovation, Interactive Learning and Economic Performance, Amsterdam, Elsevier, forthcoming. Dahl M. S. (2003), ‘Knowledge Diffusion and Regional Clusters: Lessons from the Danish ICT Industry’, Unpublished PhD Thesis, Department of Business Studies, Aalborg University. Drejer, I. (1999), ‘Technological change and interindustrial linkages – introducing knowledge-flows in input-output analysis’, Unpublished PhD Thesis, Department of Business Studies, Aalborg University. 37 Etzkowitz, H. and Leydesdorff, L. (2000), ‘The dynamics of innovation:From national systems and “mode 2” to a triple helix of university-industry and government relations’, Research Policy. Gammeltoft, P. Lundvall, B.-Å. and Muchie, M. (2003), Putting Africa First, London, Edward Elgar. Graham, D.L. (1994), ‘Cooperative extension system’, entry in Encyclopaedia of Agricultural Science, Vol 1, pp. 415430. Guile, D. (2003), ‘From “credentialism” to the “practise of learning”: reconceptualising learning for the knowledge economy’, Policy Futures in Education, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 83-105. Hoebink, P. and Van der Zanden, A. (2004), ’ Raising too many expectations? Comments on the World Bank Report Constructing Knowledge Societies: New Challenges for Higher Education’, JHEA, Vol 2, No. 3 , pp. 123-132. Hungerford, T. and Solon, G. (1987). ‘Sheepskin Effects in the Returns to Education’, Review of Economics and Statistics 69: 175-177. Jensen, M.B., Johnson, B., Lorenz, E., Lundvall, B.Å., ’Forms of Knowledge and Modes of Innovation’, forthcoming in Research Policy. Lorenz, E. and B.A. Lundvall E (eds.) (2006) How Europe’s Economies Learn: Coordinating competing models, (forthcoming) Oxford: Oxford University Press. Lorenz, E. and A. Valeyre, (2006), ‘Organizational forms and innovative performance: a comparison of the EU-15’, in E. Lorenz and B-A. Lundvall (eds.) How Europe’s Economies Learn: Coordinating competing models, (forthcoming) Oxford, Oxford University Press. Lundvall B-A (2002a) Innovation, growth and social cohesion: The Danish model. Cheltenham, UK: Elgar Publishers. Lundvall, B.-A. (2002b), 'The University in the Learning Economy', DRUID Working Papers, No. 6, 2002. ISBN: 877873-122-4. Lundvall, B.-Å. and B. Johnson (1994), ‘The Learning Economy’, Journal of Industry Studies, Vol. 1, No. 2: 23-42. Lundvall, B.-Å., Interakummerd, P. and Lauridsen J.V. (eds.) (2006), Asia’s innovation systems in transition, London, Elgar. Martin, B. and Etzkowitz, H. (2000), ‘The origin and the evolution of the university species’, VEST, Vol. 13, pp. 9-34. Nelson, R. R. and E. S. Phelps (1966). ‘Investment in Humans, Technological Diffusion, and Economic Growth’, American Economic Review 56(1/2): 69-75. Nielsen, P. (2006), The Human Side of Innovation Systems, Aalborg University Press, Aalborg. Nielsen, R.N. (2007), Innovation, human resources, and academic labour: Introduction of highly educated labour in small Danish firms, Unpublished Ph.D.-dissertation, Department of Business Studies, Aalborg University. Pedersen, Christian Ø. R. (2005), ‘The development perspective for the ICT sector in North Jutland’, Unpublished PhD Thesis, Department of Business Studies, Aalborg University. Pritchett, L. (2001), ‘ Where has all the education gone?’, The World Bank Review, Vol. 15, No. 3, pp. 367-391. Reinert, E. (1999), ‘The role of the state in economic growth’, Journal of Economic Studies, vol 26, no. 4/5. Ruiz, K. (forthcoming), ‘The Impact of Labour Institutions on Learning and Innovation Capability Building: Case Studies in Costa Rica’, Ph.D.-dissertation, Department of Business Studies, Aalborg University. Samoff, J. and Carrol, B. (2004), ‘Conditions, coalitions and influence: The World Bank and higher education in Africa’, Paper presented at the Annual conference of the comparative and international education Society. Schultz, T. W. (1975), ‘The Value of the Ability to Deal with Disequilibria’, Journal of Economic Literature: 827-846. Spence, M. (1973), ’Job Market Signalling’, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 87(3): 355-374. Vinding, A. L. (2002), Interorganizational Diffusion and Transformation of Knowledge in the Process of Product Innovation, Ph.D.-thesis, Department of Business Studies, Aalborg University. Vinding, A. L. (2004), Human Resources; Absorptive Capacity and Innovative Performance. Product Innovation, Interactive Learning and Economic Performance. J. L. Christensen and B.-Å. Lundvall. Oxford, Elsevier Ltd.: 155178. World Bank (2002), Constructing knowledge societies: New challenges for tertiary education, Washington, the World Bank. 38 39 Appendix: What can be learnt from the Globelics experience? By Bengt-Åke Lundvall Globelics (see www.globelics.org) held its first informal meeting outside Aalborg 2002. The concept was developed over the three previous years in discussions I had with colleagues from the South (Cassiolato, Gu and Muchie) and the North (Soete, Johnson, Freeman and Nelson). The first Annual Conference was held in Rio 2003. After followed annual conferences in respectively Beijing (2004), Pretoria (2005) and Trivandrum (2006). Next year’s conference will take place in Saratov, Russia. Globelics is a global research community combining scholars working on innovation studies with scholars working on development studies. It has been characterised as a network for ‘researchers without borders’ (Luc Soete). All the Globelics annual conferences have taken place in developing countries and the finance has been raised within the hosting country. Scholars from the North contribute to keep costs down by raising their own travel funds and they also try to raise some support for young scholars travelling south-south. Besides the annual conferences, regional and national networks have been established in Asia, Latin America and China (see www.cicalics.org). Each year 40 Ph.D.-students, coming equally from Asia, Africa, Latin America and Europe, are invited to Globelics Academy in Lisbon where world-leading scholars in innovation studies for 10 days period give lectures and methodological advice for their thesis work. A similar Cicalics Academy takes place in China every year with a majority of Chinese students and of international lecturers. New initiatives in Africa and India may soon result in similar activities in these areas. The purpose of globelics is to counterbalance the increasingly uneven global access to research networks. It gives scholars in less developed countries access to the most recent research and it opens up channels for publication of their work. It also makes it possible to share experiences among scholars from different parts of the developing world, by-passing the metro poles in the North. Several major research projects with global scope use globelics as host – the Catch-Up project coordinated by Richard Nelson, The Brics-project coordinated by Jose Cassiolato and the Unidev project co-ordinated by Claes Brundenius. Globelics has a scientific board with distinguished scholars such as Christopher Freeman and Richard Nelson and with leading scholars from the South. But basically Globelics is a self-organising global network. It draws its energy mainly from the fact that scholars from the North and the South find it highly rewarding to work together and learn from each other in a seriously committed but friendly atmosphere. One major long term positive effect is that young scholars from all parts of the world, sometimes working in isolation and under difficult conditions, get inspiration and support in their effort to do good research on innovation. There is already a lively ‘globelics community’ of young scholars who correspond regularly on both a scientific and a social basis. It is difficult to say if the globelics experiment can be replicated in other fields of knowledge. The innovation research community has always had a strong social dimension that was brought into it by the leading scholars in the field Christopher Freeman, Keith Pavitt and Richard Nelson. Without this social capital the experiment might have failed. If it could be replicated it would certainly be a highly efficient way of contributing to capacity building in the South. It is low-cost and highly productive in terms of publications and research training. And it is certainly more enjoyable than most other research endeavours. 40
﻿VADYBA / MANAGEMENT. 2006 m. Nr. 2(11) 82THE ROLE OF HIGHER EDUCATION TO ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
Irena Macerinskiene, Birute Vaiksnoraite 
During the second half of the last century, the question of educational expansion attracted much attention and the debate revolved mostly around the evaluation of its socio-economic benefits and costs. Nowadays in the context of the European higher education policy, the knowledge economy discourse expressed in the EU Lisbon Agenda rendered higher education increasingly important for the development of nation’s economies through their central tasks of generation, application and dissemination of knowledge and training high skilled labour force. In this paper we have analysed the role of higher education to economic development by highlighting private and societal benefits of university education as well as trying to look at possible negative effects that higher education expansion might have. In addition, we made an overview of empirical studies, providing us with the evidence from cross-country analyses whether higher education promotes economic growth at macroeconomic level. Most empirical studies show, that there exist only weak and elusive connections between education and economic development. 
Key words: economic development, higher education, private and societal benefits of higher education, human capitalIntroduction 
Concern about expansion of higher education in Western Europe and North America is not a recent phenomenon. Major changes took place in the 19th century that prepared the way for increased participation (Curtis and Boultwood 1966) and, with the acceleration of the process since the end of the Second World War, higher education has become de facto part of the national system of education in most European countries. Since the 1960s, human capital theorists have presented education as one of the most productive means of growth investment. Acquiring a university degree is a form of human capital investment. 
Nowadays in the context of the European higher education policy, the ideas of human capital theorists have reached its definitive expression in the EU Lisbon Agenda. The first priority in the Lisbon strategy for Europe is the realisation of the knowledge society, based on dynamic and competitive knowledge-based economy. The term is associated with the recognition of the role of knowledge in economic growth. The concept of knowledge economy or knowledge society is often used to illustrate the shift from an economy based on the low skills industrial production to knowledge intensive production and services as the back bone of the economy, or the shift from a fordist to a post-fordist society, marked by denationalisation and transnationalisation of state regulation, transnational flow of capital and ensuing global competition. The discourse of knowledge economy emphasizes the shift to knowledge intensive high skills labour force, international circulation of brains, life long leaning, transferable skills and competences and knowledge management as a key individual and organisational capacity. 
A competitive economy can only be based on a well-educated population as well as a dynamic R&D sector. The two components of knowledge the human beings (“human capital”) and the technology have become central to economic development. In the age of globalisation, the knowledge economy discourse has become a way to characterize the new relationships between the state, society and economy and rendered higher education increasingly important for the international competitiveness of the nation states through their central tasks of generation, application and dissemination of knowledge and training high skilled labour force. 
In this paper we have analysed the role of higher education to economic development by highlighting private and societal benefits of university education as well as trying to look at possible negative effects that higher education expansion might have. In addition, we made an overview of empirical studies, providing us with the evidence from cross-country analyses whether higher education promotes economic growth at macroeconomic level. 
Higher education influences economic well-being in three ways. First, the direct expenditures by the institutions, their employees, and their students impact the local economy. This spending multiplies through the local economy until the monies are used to purchase goods and services from outside the local area. Second, higher education provides financial and non-financial benefits to the individual who pursues an advanced education and to society in general. Third, institutions of higher education are increasingly focused on knowledge creation. Thus, universities are sources of key research and development innovations that simultaneously can be beneficial to society and conducive to economic growth. 
Our academic institutions are publicly funded institutions entrusted with two main tasks: to carry out research and to educate part of the next generation at a higher level. In this context, the qualitative aspect of the expansion of higher education has been concerned with the strategic options for economic growth favoured by decision-makers. These strategic options have ranged from the priority given to broadening access to 
VADYBA / MANAGEMENT. 2006 m. Nr. 2(11) 83 
undergraduate studies, with an implicit endogenous growth model based on the importance of human capital accumulation, to priority given to research activities, with an implicit exogenous growth model based on the importance of technical innovation as a driving force behind future economic growth. Although education policy makers when allocating funds always have to choose between those options, in fact, a combination of both is important if higher growth is to be achieved. Besides, analysis at a macro-level has proved, that it is particularly difficult to distinguish and separate the respective contribution to economic development of the technological infrastructure and know-how and of human capital, understood as the quantitative and qualitative characteristics of the workforce measured by using the average educational level of the population (OECD 1998).Analyzing the contribution of higher education to economic well – being we will discuss benefits provided to individuals by acquiring a university degree, as well as will try to describe benefits, that society in general experiences because of better educated individuals in it. 
1. Personal Benefits of Higher Education 1.1. Monetary benefits In micro-economic terms human capital theory relies on the implicit understanding that through education the individual acquires competences and skills whose essential characteristic is the ability to be transferable and negotiable on the employment market and which also have a transactional value and a direct bearing on individuals‘ average income throughout his live. The average earnings of individuals are closely related to their educational attainment. In particular, those with a bachelor’s degree earn substantially more than even those with some college education. Relative to those with a bachelor’s degree, a postgraduate degree provides nearly as large a boost in earnings. The higher salaries that educated entrants are able to command on the job market represent both the interest on the capital they have invested in education and the fact that they have become more productive by having invested, regardless of the type of education they have received. However, rapid changes in employment conditions, the future macroeconomic environment, technical innovation and skills obsolescence are amongst the variables that throw into question the full validity of the human capital model applied to the individual. 
To compare the return on investment offered by a university education with other investments, it is useful to compute the “internal rate of return.” This is the discount rate that equalizes the present value of benefits and costs. The concept of internal rate of return is equivalent to what financial economists refer to as the “yield to maturity” on a financial asset. Returns calculated in this way can be compared across all kinds of loans or bond purchases, regardless of the time pattern of interest and principal payments. Based on a cost- benefit analysis over a person’s working life, the expected net return from an individual’s payment of tuition and fees and foregone income while obtaining a bachelor’s degree, in most studies is estimated to be between 10 and 13 percent. Such estimates suggests, that financial returns from higher education compares favourably with real returns on most financial assets and this kind of investment is as good as or better than most investments a family could make for its children. A reverse corollary of this understanding might be, that when employers are prepared to hire less qualified people, rates of participation in formal education decrease accordingly as the possibility of earning an immediate salary increases the opportunity cost of staying longer in formal education. 
The differential in earnings based on educational attainment has increased over time. Analysis confirms that the incomes of university graduates, especially those with advanced degrees, have been rising faster than the incomes of those with no university education. This rising differential constitutes the principal evidence for the emerging “knowledge economy.” 
1.2. Distinguishing the Effects of Educational Attainment from Ability Social scientists long have been concerned that simple correlations between educational attainment and earnings may overstate the causal role played by education in determining earnings capacity. Individuals with high innate abilities, cognitive and non-cognitive, find it easier to be successful in school and will complete more years of schooling. But these innate abilities are themselves important in determining earnings capacity. Because abilities are difficult to observe, the correlation between educational attainment and unobserved ability will confound attempts to identify the true effect of education on earnings. 
One method statisticians use to try to correct for unobserved and missing variables is a technique known as “instrumental variables”. In the case of earnings and its relationship to educational attainment (observed) and ability (unobserved), the idea is to find another variable (the instrument), that determines and correlates with education but is itself uncorrelated with ability. The true effect of education on earnings can be estimated 
VADYBA / MANAGEMENT. 2006 m. Nr. 2(11) 84by replacing observed education with the value for education predicted by the instrument in an earnings regression (Hill, Hoffman and Rex, 2005). 
Some studies of the benefits of schooling have tried to deal with the issue of ability bias by using special data sets. Card’s (1999) studies of identical twins, for example, find that the benefit of schooling is 10 percent lower than simple estimates. If one believes that identical twins have identical abilities, then these findings suggest only a small upward bias in simple estimates of the effect of education on earnings. Another special data opportunity arises when countries enact broad changes in compulsory schooling laws. Britain, for example, in 1972 raised the age at which children could leave school from 15 to 16. With the new law, about one quarter of the youth population was forced to stay in school an extra year. Presumably there was no difference in the distributions of innate ability between people born in 1955/1956 and those born a little later who were affected by the law. Yet those born later, those with extra schooling, had significantly higher earnings later in adulthood. Estimates from these data suggest an earnings benefit of at least 10 percent for the extra year of schooling (Card 2002). 
In summary, the issue of ability bias remains a formidable statistical problem for education researchers. But the weight of evidence from dozens of studies and the consensus view of social scientists is that the earnings differential between people with different levels of educational attainment is primarily a reflection of education itself, not differences in ability. 
1.3. Non-monetary benefits In addition to higher earnings opportunities, individuals with higher education experience some non- monetary benefits. University education makes individuals more entrepreneurial and adaptable through increased flexibility in the face of change and difficulties, so besides increased income it also provides a good protection against unemployment. International statistics presented in the work of Howe (1994) reveals a clear relationship between the education level and the employment prospect. The highest employment rate is observed among persons with tertiary education, followed by persons with secondary education. The highest unemployment rate is recorded for persons with basic education or less. Wang (2003), in an extensive study of the impact of universities on surrounding cities, finds that proximity to institutions of higher learning even induce greater rates of job growth. 
Education provides a variety of benefits to students including enhanced social skills, greater awareness of human achievement, and an appreciation for cultural diversity. Increasing education is associated with better working conditions, lower disability rates, longer job tenure, more on-the job training opportunities, and more promotion opportunities. The value of these non-monetary benefits adds to the economic returns to education. 
2. Societal Benefits of Higher Education 2.1 Monetary benefits Human capital theory proponents cite two types of the benefits to society from investments in higher education: monetary and non-monetary. Societal monetary benefits of a workforce with greater educational attainment and skills can be traced to the enhanced worker productivity associated with greater educational attainment. These productivity gains translate into higher output and incomes for the economy. 
While widely discussed, relatively few authors have attempted to quantify the social monetary benefits of higher education investments. One way to do so is to examine whether regional economies with greater proportions of college trained workers exhibit evidence of prosperity that may be attributed to the higher levels of education attainment. Recent work by Moretti (2004) is a notable exception. Moretti examines the relationship between greater labour force shares of college graduates and the wages attained by all workers, as well as the productivity of manufacturing enterprises. 
The challenge in quantifying the social benefits of higher education is to establish statistical evidence of a causal relationship linking additional education to observed outcomes. Otherwise, the relationship may be simply a correlation of higher wage employment opportunities and greater numbers of college graduates, or a relationship of both to unobservable attributes. The following provides a technical perspective: 
If changes in the share of college graduates are positively related to unobservable factors that influence labour supply, then simple ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates (e.g. simple correlations) of the impact of college graduates on wages would be biased downward, understating the extent that college graduates actually contribute to wage determination. Essentially the positive labour supply shocks dampen wages and obscure the positive impact that graduates have on the labour market. 
If changes in the share of college graduates are positively related to unobservable factors that influence labour demand, then simple OLS estimates of the impact of college graduates on wages would be 
VADYBA / MANAGEMENT. 2006 m. Nr. 2(11) 85 
biased upward, overstating the extent that college graduates actually contribute to wage determination. Essentially the positive demand shocks increase wages so the observed wage effect is the combination of the demand shock and the effect of increased graduates in the area. 
Moretti controls for a host of factors that explain wage and productivity differentials across cities and through time, uses instrumental variable techniques to account for potential reverse causation, and checks results against a distinct longitudinal data set. These approaches are designed to establish evidence, or lack thereof, of a causal relationship. 
Moretti finds, after controlling for other factors, that a 1 percent increase in the labour force share of college graduates in a city drives up wages for all workers: 
1.9 percent for labour force participants without a high school diploma; 1.6 percent for labour force participants with a high school diploma; 0.4 percent for college graduates. One explanation for these higher wages in areas with higher educational attainment is the enhancement of productivity that comes with a workforce with more education and skills. Moretti argues, that the observed wage benefits are a combination of spillovers, complementarities and substitution effects that are induced by changes in the labour force composition that take place as a natural consequence of labour market adjustments triggered by the change in the supply of educated workers. 
The biggest portion of this significant wage effect is attributable to spillovers, which are the benefits that extend to third parties other than students and institutions of higher education. The source of these spillovers is the greater labour productivity that educated workers bring to the labour force. Spillovers may be technological, when social interaction is a catalyst for learning and overall knowledge creation. The more contact that takes place among educated people, the more the stock of knowledge expands. Learning and networking are important determinants of knowledge creation. According to Lucas (1988), productivity spillovers are large enough to explain the differences between rich and poor countries. The spillovers provide a basis for public investment in endeavours that increase the number of college graduates in the workforce. 
All of the wage effects in Moretti’s work cannot be attributed to spillovers generated by the additional graduates because other labour market effects also exist, but estimates of the net wage effect on college graduate wages alone help establish a lower bound for the spillover effect. The wage increment represents the net effect of the social spillovers and the wage-dampening supply shock induced by the greater number of college graduates. If the additional supply of graduates has a greater impact on wages than does the social spillover, the net impact on wages of college graduates would be negative. Instead, Moretti’s estimates suggest a net positive increment to wages of 0.4 percent. Assuming that the supply shock has zero effect (unlikely but arithmetically conceivable), a lower bound for the social spillover effect for college graduates is obtained at 0.4 percent though the actual spillover effect is likely to be larger. 
The idea of complementarities lies under the assumption, that physical and human capital can be complementary. Increased education, knowledge, and skills create an increase in the quality of the existing physical capital stock — increasing the productivity of capital that translates in higher labour productivity for all workers. For example, more educated workers use more sophisticated equipment that results in improved productivity. Moretti provides empirical evidence of this productivity enhancement. 
Romer (1988) provides an explanation of substitution effects. As the knowledge economy increases in importance, the role of human capital may outstrip physical capital and labour in determining aggregate growth rates across countries. Using this argument, the acquisition of knowledge capital creates “endogenous” growth — growth that feeds on itself — and economic returns that accelerate. This argument is widely discussed among economists as one of the most important ways in which bigger accumulation of highly educated workforce and higher education institutions impact regions economy trough innovation driven endogenous growth. University boosters often cite links between scientific breakthroughs from university research and subsequent product development by high-tech firms. Jorgensen (2000) et al. estimates that a considerable portion of the late 1990’s growth was directly attributable to roles played by research innovation at institutions of higher education and the greater absorptive capacity of a labour force with greater proportions of college graduates. However, some economists find such benefits fleeting, because products are usually developed elsewhere. Even though investments in research at a number of institutions may increase the inventive activity of R&D laboratories located within the same metropolitan region, any resulting new products or processes will frequently be developed in other locations, where labour force is cheaper. 
Glaeser et al. (2000) also examined wages in cities — identifying effects that accrue to those cities with higher education and skill levels. Results point to agglomeration spillovers that manifest themselves in faster 
VADYBA / MANAGEMENT. 2006 m. Nr. 2(11) 86growth and higher wages as educated people interact. Gottlieb and Fogarty (2003), using similar data, confirm the result and note that it persists across a wide range of cities even after controlling for region. 
One more source of monetary social benefits that has to be mentioned is that to the extent that university graduates earn and spend more than those without a degree, the government collects more tax revenue from university graduates, which represents a social good. The taxes paid by university graduates repay the public cost of their education several times over. 
2.2. Non-monetary benefits In addition to monetary benefits, a long list of non-monetary societal benefits from enhanced educational attainment in regions with greater shares of educated workers, especially highly educated workers has been documented. Wolfe and Haveman (2002) have suggested the following list of non-monetary societal benefits: 
Non-wage labour market remuneration, such as fringe benefits, and the quality of working conditions are positively affected by educational attainment levels. 
Consumer choices are more rational and efficient. Job searches are more extensive among the more highly educated, resulting in a better match between the individual and the company, which enhances efficiency. 
Savings rates are higher among the more highly educated. Research and development activities are more common and numerous in regions with higher educational attainment. 
Education is inversely related with reliance on welfare and public assistance. Investing in education reduces the necessity to invest in other public income transfer programs. Twenty-four percent of individuals without a high school diploma have at some time participated in a public assistance program, compared with 4.6 percent of those with a bachelor’s degree (Lee, 2003). 
Less criminal behaviour and lower incarceration rates occur among the more highly educated. Charitable giving increases with educational attainment. Social cohesion is higher among the more highly educated, as reflected in higher voting rates. Informed and involved voters are the foundation of a democratic society, and education helps develop skills for a democracy. Milton Friedman, a conservative economist, believed that public support for the laissez-faire approach to economic market mechanisms could be achieved by increasing knowledge: more educated individuals are less influenced by populist rhetoric and make more rational, informed decisions in voting behaviour.Perhaps most important are the intergenerational effects that accrue to investments in higher education. The educational attainment and cognitive development of children are positively affected by the educational attainment of parents (first-generation effects). The quantitative importance of these effects is very difficult to estimate precisely since costs to society incurred today to create opportunities for individuals to acquire university degrees must be compared to benefits realized two, three or four generations in the future. 
The health of the individual, their spouse, and their children are positively related to educational attainment.Desired family size is more commonly attained among those with higher educational attainment. 
Mortenson (1999) has provided an exhaustive list of activities and behaviours that are associated with having a baccalaureate degree. Those activities are beneficial for individuals themselves as well as to society in general. In addition to societal benefits in Wolfe and Haveman’s list, Mortenson has also mentioned those beneficial activities and behaviours: 
More likely to do volunteer work; Less likely to smoke; More likely to use the Internet; More likely to use computers; More likely to attend art and cultural activities; More likely to exercise; More likely to buy and read books; More likely to read newspapers and newsmagazines. As difficult as the social monetary benefits are to quantify, the implicit value of non-monetary benefits are even less conducive to measurement. However, the non-monetary contributions that more educated individuals bring to society, coupled with the reduction in social costs that they incur over their lifetimes, suggests that the non-monetary benefits represent considerable return on social investments made to support 
VADYBA / MANAGEMENT. 2006 m. Nr. 2(11) 87 
higher education. From what is said above, we can conclude that we all benefit from the monetary and non- monetary public effects of higher education and lack of university educated individuals could represent a huge cost to our society. 
3. Possible Negative Effects of Higher Education Expansion The history of the development of formal education, both in terms of participation rates and the lengthening of study-time has gone hand in hand with a critical questioning of its real necessity, its usefulness and even its potential drawbacks and dangers. Recent growth of higher education has raised concerns that are not entirely dissimilar from those expressed when primary and, in particular, secondary schooling expanded in the course of the 19th and 20th centuries. Mandeville’s (1732) criticisms of charity schools, Schumpeter’s (1943) forecasts of growing dissatisfaction among ‘sub-employed’ graduates and today’s recurrent criticisms of expansionist trends in higher education in the form of the ‘more means worst’, ‘dumbing down’ or ‘over- education’ debates share a suspicion of the worth of educational expansion. 
It is noted that the rapid expansion in higher and continuing education has negatively impacted the quality of educational outcomes. More and more young people gaining access to higher education now come from an educational and often social background with little tradition of university education. In the case of Lithuania - and the same would be true in many other European countries - the rapid increase in volume due to a rapid increase in participation rates has reinforced a sense of crisis within academia as this evolution has more or less directly called into question its traditional culture and values. Expansion of higher education in most European countries has brought about the availability of new qualifications (e.g. the creation of multi- disciplinary courses and the relative demise of single honour degrees), the setting-up of new degree programmes, the formal definition of new levels of study (e.g. qualifications at sub-degree level, the development of taught masters degrees) and/or the reorganisation of syllabuses and examination practice (e.g. the development of credit accumulation and transfer). The extent to which these pedagogical changes have become widespread and even a permanent feature of a higher education system will have a considerable impact on the process and output of the sector. In particular, they are likely to breed a sense of loss and uncertainty among both academics and employers because the meaning of working towards and holding a university degree is no longer what it was. In this situation, quality management becomes a key element in ensuring a proper return on education. Quality assurance represents process control procedures to reduce variations in outcomes. In higher education it involves an accreditation system, standardized curricula and textbooks, the qualifications of faculty, teaching facilities, teacher/student ratio, etc. The international ISO10015 is a quality standard for education and training. Its function is to ensure the effectiveness of the educational system. 
While human capital theory offers a partial explanation for an understanding of the demand side of expansion in education, it is of little help in terms of supply for it considers education and training to be like any other goods with supply adjusting to demand. This may be true for certain specific types of short-term training programmes but, for various reasons mostly related to time-lag, it does not reflect accurately what is happening in other parts of the higher education sector. This suggests numerous sources of market failure, such as uncertainties, asymmetrical information or risk avoidance behaviour. For example in Britain a general increase in the schooling level has been accompanied by a modification of the direct relation between academic titles and their associated social status. Machin (1999) states that throughout the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s, the time-series pattern of the relative supply of highly educated workers and wage changes shows that there has been a dampening down of wages in response to increased supply. Over the years, similar jobs have been filled by increasingly qualified staff as more people with higher qualifications have emerged from the educational system. Some graduates have even experienced the growing gap between the nominal value (i.e. name and level) of their degrees and their market value in real transactional situations in the form of periods of unemployment or sub-degree level occupations. This goes a long way towards explaining the semantic shift in relation to expansion in higher education to terms such as hyperinflation and the devaluation of diplomas (Deer, 2001). 
Various sociological explanations have been put forward to interpret this phenomenon. For the neo- Durkheimian school of thought the rapid expansion of higher education has exposed the symbolic dimension that has always been implicitly embedded in university titles through the social and cultural representation of their rarity. The systematic discrepancy that has existed between, on the one hand, the actual state and status of the academic sector and, on the other hand, the cultural representation of academia and the social strategies related to the social representation of academic titles, has helped successive governments to justify their reforms of quantitative expansion and decreasing unit costs. In the short term, the process of expansion in higher education tends to expose variations in the certifying effect of university diplomas as the number of 
VADYBA / MANAGEMENT. 2006 m. Nr. 2(11) 88candidates joining the employment market outstrips the number of graduate jobs that are available. This explains the growing use of the notions of ‘sub-employed’ graduates or an overeducated workforce. Meanwhile, employers revert to more stringent selectivity in their recruitment practices, which has the paradoxical but understandable effect of reinforcing the role of higher-level diplomas and qualifications as selection criteria. 
Japanese scientists Horii, Kitagawa and Futagami (2005) have examined the economic growth effects of limited availability of higher education in a simple endogenous growth model with overlapping generations and have found that education expansion can have two opposing effects. According to them, a rise in the aggregate supply in human capital would lower its price compared to other factors summarized as physical capital. Since the distribution of production factors is not uniform across cohorts of different age - that is, human capital belongs to working-age generations whereas physical capital is largely owned by older generations–the implied change in factor prices shifts the distribution of income from the young to the old. If the aggregate saving rate is adversely affected by the reduced income of the young generation, the shift in income distribution would be critical for long-term growth. In many countries, aggregate investment in human capital is constrained by the number of higher education institutions and the enrolment capacity of each institution. These are not entirely determined by market forces but are also determined by non-economic factors such as history, culture, and the social system of the country, as well as the government’s education policies. The limited availability of higher education puts an upper bound on the rate at which the economy can accumulate human capital, hence potentially restricts the rate of economic growth. At the same time, however, the scarcity of human capital keeps its price high and thereby enables young households to earn a larger share of the aggregate output than without such a limitation. Their increased savings contribute to maintaining a high rate of accumulation of both physical and human capital and therefore of growth. The relative significance of the two opposing effects is shown to depend on the stage of development to which the economy in question belongs. In agrarian countries, or more precisely in economies where the nature of existing knowledge allows it to be transferred intergenerationally largely without higher education, the savings-enhancing effect is marginal and therefore expanding enrolment capacity promotes growth in the long run. Conversely, in industrialized economies where the transfer of existing knowledge is substantially dependent on higher education, there is a range of levels of the availability within which the savings-enhancing effect dominates the growth-restricting effect. In this case, the economy has a balanced growth path on which human capital accumulation is constrained by limited availability but nonetheless grows faster than in the case without such a limitation. It implies, however, that a further expansion in enrolment capacity will lower the long-term rate of growth since it causes a regime change beyond which the limited availability is no longer binding. After the regime change, young households no longer enjoy rent from the limited aggregate supply of human capital and therefore their savings cannot maintain that high rate of growth in the long run. 
De Gregorio (1996) has examined the issue of the limited availability of education in the context of credit market imperfections. He constructs an endogenous growth model in which the availability of education is limited by the borrowing constraints imposed on the young generation, and argues that relaxing these constraints has two opposing effects on growth. First, it makes possible a rapid accumulation of human capital through increased participation in education, which has a positive effect on long-term growth. Second, it enables young households to enjoy more consumption by borrowing more, which reduces the aggregate saving rate and therefore has a negative effect on growth. Some authors have already pointed out the possibility that severe borrowing constraints rather accelerate economic growth by encouraging aggregate savings. Modigliani (1986), for example, argues that credit market imperfections prevent households from borrowing as much as would be required to carry out an unconstrained optimum consumption plan, which has the general effect of postponing consumption and increasing wealth as well as savings. If the second effect dominates the first, relaxing the borrowing constraint reduces the rate of economic growth. 
4. Empirical Evidence from Cross-country Analyses of Higher Educations’ Role to 
Economic Development Now, when we have highlighted private and societal benefits of university education as well as tried to look at possible negative effects that higher education expansion might have, it is just the right time to make an overview of empirical studies, providing us with the evidence from cross-country analyses whether higher education promotes economic growth at macroeconomic level. Although this may appear to be obvious as there is the common belief of the importance of universities as an engine of growth, deeper examination has proved to be an uneasy task for economists. Given that human capital is individually productive, existing models of economic growth predict that education should enhance growth (e.g., Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 
VADYBA / MANAGEMENT. 2006 m. Nr. 2(11) 89 
2004). The growth accounting literature devotes enormous effort to confirming this prediction using aggregate data, but so far, most studies only find weak and elusive connections between education and economic growth. Using the Solow (1956) growth model, Mankiw, Romer and Weil (1992) argue that a large part of cross- country differences in steady-state income is explained by a certain measure of human capital. Using growth accounting techniques, King and Smith (1988) estimated that only 1.9 percent of annual economic growth rates from 1940 to 1980 were non-education related. Pencavel (1991) estimates that from 1913 to 1950 only 1.3 percent of total growth was directly attributable to higher education, but higher education accounted for 14.6 percent of the growth from 1973 to 1984. Mingat and Tan (1996) for the period 1960 to 1995, the social rate of return of tertiary education for OECD countries have estimated at more than 10 percent. 
Islam (1995) finds, however, that once differences in technologies (individual country effects) are accounted for by a dynamic panel data model, the role of human capital becomes insignificant. Romer (1989), De Gregorio (1992), Barro and Lee (1994), Benhabib and Spiegel (1994), and Pritchett (2001) also report that the direct effect of human capital on growth is either insignificant or even negative. Topel (1999) and Temple (2001) argue that the growth effect of education is found to be positive under more sophisticated specifications, but both admit that the literature connecting human capital investment to economic growth is still inconclusive. 
Economic growth may have taken place because of rising education in certain countries such as Germany, Britain or France, but until a clear methodology can demonstrate that historical events have persistently followed the logic that states that education precedes any economic development, it is equally plausible to suggest that nations which have experienced fast economic growth and increased wealth have consequently been able to invest more in education. Empirical evidence form cross-country studies allows us to draw an inference, that the exact nature of the causal link between the two – education and economic development - remains undetermined. With the rapid introduction and development of new techniques and technologies, it is reasonable to think that more investment in education in industrialised countries will help boost future rates of economic growth. However, whether this will generate for individuals and society returns on the scale of the two-digit figures that are currently being advanced to justify expansion remains to be seen. In purely economic terms, this may turn out to be a speculative bubble. 
Conclusion The average earnings of individuals are closely related to their educational attainment. The higher salaries that educated entrants are able to command on the job market represent both the interest on the capital they have invested in higher education and the fact that they have become more productive. Monetary benefits to society from investments in higher education are higher wages for all workers in areas with bigger share of highly educated labour force, which also streams from the enhancement of productivity that comes from combination of spillovers, complementarities and substitution effects. In addition to monetary benefits, a long list of non-monetary societal benefits from enhanced educational attainment has been documented. Higher education expansion might have possible negative effects like decreased quality of educational outcomes, sub- employed graduates or an overeducated workforce. Overviewed cross-country analyses find only weak and elusive evidence that higher education promotes economic growth, therefore the exact nature of the causal link between the two remains undetermined. It is equally plausible to suggest that nations which have experienced fast economic growth and increased wealth have consequently been able to invest more in education. 
REFERENCES 1. Barro R. and Lee J. H. Sources of Economic Growth. Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, No. 40, 1994, pp. 1- 
46 2. Barro R. and Sala-i-Martin X. Economic Growth. 2nd Ed. MIT Press, Cambridge,Mass, 2004 3. Benhabib J. and Spiegel M. The Role of Human Capital in Economic Development: Evidence from Aggregate Cross-Country 
Data. Journal of Monetary Economics, No. 34, 1994, pp. 143-174 4. Card D. Education Matters: Commentary. The Milken Institute Review, Fourth Quarter 2002, pp. 73-77 5. Card D. The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings. Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3, Amsterdam, Elsevier Science, 
1999 6. Curtis S.J. and Boultwood M.E.A. An Introductory History of English Education since 1800. London, University Tutorial Press, 
1966 7. De Gregorio J. Borrowing Constraints, Human Capital Accumulation, and Growth. Journal of Monetary Economics, No. 37, 1996, 
pp. 49-71 8. De Gregorio J. Economic Growth in Latin America. Journal of Development Economics, No. 39(1), 1992, pp. 59-84 9. Deer C. Higher Education and Economic Development. SKOPE Research Paper No.17, 2001, ISSN 1466-1535 10. Glaeser E.and Mare D. Cities and Skills. Journal of Labor Economics, April 2000 11. Gotlieb P. and Fogarty M. Educational Attainment and Metropolitan Growth. Economic Development Quarterly, November 2003, 
pp. 325-336 
VADYBA / MANAGEMENT. 2006 m. Nr. 2(11) 9012. Hill K., Hoffman D. and Rex T.R. The Value of Higher Education: Individual and Societal Benefits. www.wpcarey.asu.edu/seid/, 
2005 13. Horii R., Kitagawa A. and Futagami K. Availability of Higher Education and Long-Term Economic Growth. 2005 September, 
http://econwpa.wustl.edu/eps/dev/papers/0504/0504005.pdf 14. Howe W. J. Effects of Higher Education on Unemployment Rates. Higher Education and Economic Growth, ed. William E. 
Becker and Darrel R. Lewis, Kluwer Publications, 1994 15. Human Capital Investment: an International Comparison. Paris, OECD Centre for Education Research and Innovation, 1998 16. Islam N. Growth Empirics: A Panel Data Approach. Quarterly Journal of Economics, No. 110(4), 1995 17. Jorgenson D.and Stiroh K. Raising the Speed Limit: U.S. Economic Growth in the Information Age. Brooking Papers on 
Economic Activity, 2000 18. King E. M. and Smith J. P. Computing Economic Loss in Cases of Wrongful Death (R-3549-ICJ) Santa Monica: The Rand 
Corporation, 1988 19. Lee J. Higher Education: Who Benefits? Vol. 9, No. 3, May 2003, www.nea.org/he/ 20. Lucas R.E. On the Mechanics of Economic Development. Journal of Monetary Economics, 1988, No. 22, pp.3-42 21. Machin S. Wage Inequality in the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s. The State of Working Britain. P. Gregg and J. Wadsworth. Manchester, 
New York, Manchester University Press, 1999, pp.185-204 22. Mandeville B. The Fable of the Bees; or Private vices public benefits. London, J.Tonson, 1732 23. Mankiw N.G., Romer D. and Weil D.N. A Contribution to the Empirics of Economic Growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 
No. 107, 1992, pp. 407-437 24. Mingat A. and Tan J. The Full Social Returns to Education: Estimates based on countries' economic growth performance. 
Washington DC, World Bank, 1996 25. Modigliani F. Life Cycle, Individual Thrift, and the Wealth of Nations. American Economic Review, No. 76(3), 1986, pp. 297-313 26. Moretti E. Estimating the Social Return to Higher Education: Evidence from Longitudinal and Repeated Cross-Sectional Data. 
Journal of Econometrics, July/August 2004, pp. 175-212 27. Mortenson T. Why College? Private Correlates of Educational Attainment. Postsecondary Opportunity, No. 81, March 1999 28. Pencavel J. Higher Education Productivity and Earning: A Review. Journal of Economic Education, Vol. 22, No. 4, 1991, pp 331- 
359 29. Pritchett L. Where Has All the Education Gone? World Bank Economic Review, No. 15, 2001, pp. 367-391 30. Romer P.M. Human Capital and Growth: Theory and Evidence. NBER Working Papers, No. 3173, 1989 31. Schumpeter J. A. Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. London, Allen &Unwin, 1943 32. Solow R. M. A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics, No. 70, 1956, pp. 65-94 33. Temple J. Generalizations that Aren’t? Evidence on Education and Growth. European Economic Review, No. 45, 2001, pp. 905- 
918 34. Topel R. Labor Markets and Economic Growth. Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3, Amsterdam, Elsevier Science, 1999 35. Wang H. Long-term Effects of Institutions of Higher Education on the Regional Economy. University of Michigan, 2005 36. Wolfe B.and Haveman R. Accounting for the Social and Non-Market Benefits of Education. The Contributions of Human and Social Capital to Sustained Economic Growth and Well-Being, ed. J. Helliwell, International Symposium Report, OECD and HRDC, pp. 221-250, 2002
﻿Strengthening the Relationship between Higher Education and Regional Economic Development By Mi Zhou, Faculty and Part-time Ph.D. Candidate, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, P. R. China Management School, University of Science and Technology of China, and Louis C. Vaccaro, Ph.D., President Emeritus, Siena Heights University, Adrian, Michigan, USA Visiting Professor and Senior Advisor, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, P. R. China ABSTRACT This paper analyzes the relationship between higher education institutions (HEIs) and regional economic development, focusing on the evolvement of various systems of higher education, and stressing that strengthening higher education is a key strategy for successful economic development. Further, this paper investigates and studies the crucial factors that enable certain national higher educational systems to achieve a high level of success and which promote economic development, while addressing the needs and objectives of specific countries and/or regions. The paper posits that the values of academic freedom must occupy the highest priority in educational systems that aspire to promote its national and/or regional goals for sustainable economic development. In studying the current situation in various parts of China, this paper discusses the essential progressive need to promote academic freedom in Chinese colleges and universities, which is necessary for all successful colleges and universities. This, in turn, will enable them to encourage and prepare research personnel, business leaders, and entrepreneurs, while developing cutting-edge innovations and industries. Finally, this paper seeks to identify and discuss specific strategies and programs that have proven successful in certain regions/countries and that can be adapted to the current educational needs of growing and vibrant countries such as China. INTRODUCTION Consistent with the experience of most developed countries, knowledge has been the major incentive and foundation for successful economic development (Ledgerwood & Broadhurst, 1998; Laukkanen, 2000; Peck & McGuinness, 2003). Higher education institutions (HEIs) are places where knowledge is acquired and transmitted, and successful enterprises rely on them to achieve sustainable development through the transfer of technology, the cultivation of talents and ideas, and the promotion of entrepreneurship. Regional analyses suggest that success depends heavily on institutional “thickness” (Amin and Thrift, 1994; Indergaard, 1997; Cooke and Morgan, 1998, cited in Allison & Keane, 2001) or so called “social capital” (Putman, 1993, cited in Allison & Keane, 2001). We firmly believe that successful economic development relies heavily on a vibrant and progressive system of higher education. Depending on the level of economic development in a specific country or region, certain key ingredients are absolutely essential and are best provided by the higher education establishment. For example, in countries or regions with a low level of economic development and significant needs, the most critical ingredient is for a system of higher education that addresses the basic needs of literacy, fundamental scientific knowledge and an understanding of how economic systems function. In contrast, in the more highly developed countries or regions, the need for higher education resources will include a more sophisticated level of teaching faculty, plus a highly productive and competent level of research capabilities of university faculty members. Between these two extremes, exist models of economic development that call for varying levels of competence, skills, application and resolve. As the economies in certain nations and/or regions develop, the higher education systems need to adapt in order to better serve the changes and assist the process of development. According to the World University Rankings (The Times Higher Education Supplement [THES], 2006), the top ranked universities are primarily located in the more developed countries. This is because in the early stages, higher education in those countries adopted the necessary policies to develop itself, thereby assisting economic development in those nations. The higher education systems and economies in those areas have mutually promoted each other, so that the more developed areas have the best higher education systems, and those countries that have better higher education systems have more highly developed economies compared with other nations and regions. America was a relatively poor country when it was first established, but things began to change about the time that the country embraced the concept of academic freedom as practiced in Germany in the 19th century. In addition, because the United States persisted on this path, America’s HEIs have been continuously enhanced. According to THES (2006), among the top 20 world universities, 11 universities are located in the United States. And according to the University Ranking of Shanghai Jiao Tong University (2005), there are 17 universities located in the United States among the top 20 world universities. These universities and their graduates eventually helped the economic development of the nation, so that the United States is one of the most highly developed countries in the world. When one examines the relative achievements of universities that have been ranked in the top tier of all universities worldwide, in contrast to those that have been ranked in the bottom tier, it is easy to discern the reasons for the success of the higher ranked universities. It is not merely their technical skills and knowledge that sets them apart. More specifically, those institutions that have been ranked in the upper ten percent of all colleges and universities worldwide exist within an environment that has promoted and continues to promote and protect academic freedom to learn, teach and conduct research. This paper analyzes the critical role that higher education plays in regional economic development. It also focuses on the development of certain systems of higher education and stresses that improving higher education is a key strategy for regional economic development. Further, this paper investigates and studies the critical factors that enable certain national higher educational systems to achieve a high level of success and which promote economic development while addressing the needs and objectives of specific countries and/or regions. In studying the current situation in various regions of China, this paper then discusses the need for certain changes and modifications in Chinese colleges and universities which would enable them to achieve higher levels of success in competition with colleges and universities worldwide. Finally, this paper identifies and discusses specific strategies and programs that have been proven successful in certain regions/countries and that can be adapted to the current educational needs of growing and vibrant countries such as China. HIGHER EDUCATION AND REGIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Beginning with the passage of the Morrill Land-Grant College Act in 1862, the American government has prevailed upon higher education institutions to assist in the development of the national economy (Perorazio, 2000). Thus, the relationship between higher education and government can be described as an ongoing series of “social contracts” – an expectation that higher education should provide a return to the society for the public investment provided (Perorazio, 2000). Since the late 1800’s, additional studies have focused on the relationship between higher education and economic development. Previous research had focused mainly on three points: 1) HEIs can provide knowledge and skills that meet the demands of regional economic development; 2) HEIs play a critical role in regional economic development; 3) HEIs are promoters of internationalization, which links the local to the global. Producers of Knowledge According to Duderstadt (2000), we are now entering the age of knowledge, in which the key strategic resource necessary for prosperity has become knowledge itself. As knowledge is created, absorbed, and applied – primarily by keenly educated minds – universities in particular will play increasingly important roles. Erich Bloch, former Director of the U.S. National Science Foundation states: “The solution of virtually all the problems with which government is concerned: health, education, environment, energy, urban development, international relationships, economic competitiveness, and defense and national security, all depend on creating new knowledge—and hence upon the health of our universities” (cited in Duderstadt, 2000, p. 3). Fran Hulbert, Director of Skills Policy at the North West Regional Development Agency says: “Knowledge is an invisible resource that impacts significantly on the regional economy in many ways...Universities are vast repositories of knowledge, supplying the business community with products, training, qualifications, high quality employees, consultancy services and innovation solutions. They are also a key stakeholder within the economy as a major employer, both directly and indirectly, a major owner of capital such as property and facilities – and they are also a very stable feature in the regional landscape. The cumulative power of all of these factors makes universities significant strategic partners both within the region itself, and as a national voice to influence government.” (Cited in Robson, Keith, & Deas, 1998, ¶ 3) According to Knight (1995, cited in Allison & Keane, 2001), the focus on knowledge has been a key feature of economic development in the 1990’s. In “post-modern” economic structures, knowledge-creating enterprises, including universities and professional firms, are seen as critical to developing competitive advantage for localities (Ledgerwood & Broadhurst, 1999). Regional analyses also suggest that success depends heavily on institutional “thickness” (Amin and Thrift, 1994; Indergaard, 1997; Cooke and Morgan, 1998, cited in Allison & Keane, 2001) or so called ”social capital” (Putman,1993, cited in Allison & Keane, 2001)). Regional economies should be knowledge-based. To achieve economic success, regions need to emphasize innovation and see regional constitution as learning regions (Allison & Keane, 2001). Regions ought to become learning regions to acquire economic development, since as Goddard (1997, cited in Allison & Keane, 2001) argues that institutional thickness is more than a strong presence of institutional bodies, rather, there is a high level of interaction and a mutual awareness of common purpose generating tacit knowledge and lifelong learning. Actually, the traditional role of universities is changing. Previously, the main objective of universities was to increase and transfer knowledge, but currently universities are engaged in regional economic development and they are also involved in local employment, as well as university spin-offs and growth (Lazzeretti & Tavoletti, 2005). A Crucial Factor in Regional Economic Development Chugh (1997) argues that the HEIs play a vital role in assisting business and community organizations become engaged in promoting economic development. He believes that institutions can provide small business assistance, workforce and entrepreneurial development, international trade and investment assistance, total quality management, technology transfer and product development. He also cites the Internet and computer services, economic research, environmental and forestry management, continuing education, training programs, assistance to community organizations, as well as providing conference and workshop facilities. Morgan (2002) also suggests that it now has been accepted that higher education plays a critical role in regional development. According to the National Report in UK (National Committee of Inquiry into Higher Education [NCIHE], 1997, ¶ 2), one of the purposes of higher education is: “to serve the needs of an adaptable, sustainable, knowledge-based economy at local, regional and national levels”. The British Government’s White Paper on Enterprise, Skills and Innovation (DTI and DfEE, 2001) requires Regional Development Agencies to develop their cluster strategies further, by including partnerships involving higher education (Peck & McGuinness, 2003). Vest (1996) reminds us of Michael Porter's argument about the importance of "core clusters" of talent and infrastructure for economic health. Further, Vest (1996) believes that of all the "core clusters", higher education and preeminent research universities remain our greatest asset. Robson, et al (1998) suggest that HEIs have a role in supporting local and regional economic development through a variety of aspects of HEIs’ work, such as involvement in local and regional partnerships, links with local business and industry through targeted training and research consultancies, the establishment of research incubators, science parks, quasi autonomous R&D companies and the commercialization of higher education research via spin-off companies and patents. Also cited are student placements in local businesses and the tying of student projects to the needs of businesses and local community groups, and through HEIs’ wider role as part of a network of knowledge industries, a feature which itself is used in local and regional promotion to attract overseas inward investment. Therefore, economic development policy-makers are increasingly attempting to draw universities and colleges into their strategies. Different kinds of HEIs serve different needs of economic development. Vocational institutions meet the increasing demand for skilled workers, while research institutions improve the transfer of new technologies to business, and HEIs on the whole can create better links between the needs of business and the education of students (St. Paul, 1996). A Link between Local and Global Development Concurrent with the development of economic globalization, higher education plays a most critical role in linking global and local development (Thanki, 1999). The involvement of colleges and universities in regional economic development is enhanced by the growing importance and globalization of knowledge and technology. Furthermore, colleges and universities do not merely benefit the growth of regional economies, but also they provide enhancement of social, political and cultural life in the region. Based on a case study regarding the Dutch University of Twente, Lazzeretti & Tavoletti (2005) argue that local economic relevance and international excellence are not incompatible objectives (Lazzeretti & Tavoletti, 2005). Goldstein & Drucker (2006) examined the influences of 4-year colleges and universities in the United States, focusing on the internal and external factors that affect regional economic development, and the spatial extent of their impact, while analyzing the effects of specific university functions. They found that knowledge-based university activities, particularly teaching and basic research, have substantial positive results in regional earnings gains. They argue that the greatest impact occurs in smalland medium-sized regions, and further suggest that universities may be able to function as a substitute for agglomeration economies (Goldstein & Drucker, 2006). Gunasekara (2005) discusses the role of universities in shaping regional agglomeration in Australia. He states that universities carry out an important extensive developmental role, including education, research and incubation of industries and enterprises. Lin (2004) argues that higher education overall provides a positive and significant affect on Taiwan’s economic development, and that engineering and the natural sciences majors play the most prominent role in this process. Atkinson & Reed (2000) suggest that California's education system and its economy maintain a close link with each other, and as the California economy becomes increasingly information-based, this connection will become even more consequential. The employers in the state will rely on universities more than ever to provide graduates who are well-prepared for the more intellectually demanding jobs. Since universities in the state of California understand that the success of California's future economy depends on the effectiveness of the state's education system, they are working to strengthen the education-economy continuum so that students receive the preparation they need to succeed (Atkinson & Reed, 2000). THE KEY ELEMENT OF SUCCESSFUL HEIS As the former Director of the U.S. National Science Foundation Erich Bloch states, “...to solve the problems associated with regional development, it is essential to maintain the health of universities (cited in Duderstadt, 2000)”. We argue that a healthy university must have good systems for the faculty to carry out research, to create and transfer knowledge to the students, cultivate innovation, while encourage the university to interact with industries. When we examine the top ranked universities in the world, we find that they are mainly located in the US and UK, but especially in the US. As mentioned previously, HEIs are playing a vital role in regional economic development. If one wants to improve regional development, it is essential to understand the importance of HEIs in the region, and how to maintain successful HEIs. Now, an important question needs to be asked – what is it that makes HEIs in America so successful and excellent? In China, scholars have carried out many comparative studies between Chinese universities and American universities, expecting to discover the differences between the systems of higher education in order to enhance Chinese universities. Zhang & Jiang (1994) argue that American universities have attracted the best teachers, developed better management systems, and world-class research facilities (Zhang & Jiang, 1994). Ren (2006) believes that China should adjust the orientation of universities to help the progress of the social and economic development of the nation. Pan (2006) suggests that because of the procedures, structure and function of higher education in America and China are different, the two types of higher education systems have achieved different status. Jiang (2005) argues that the main differences between the two types of higher education systems are in the framework and educational purpose of the university. Viewed from the perspective outside of China, we contend that it is essentially the values of academic freedom that lead to the main differences between these two systems of higher education. Currently, many Chinese universities are attempting to attract excellent overseas Chinese professors to return to China to teach and do research. Besides salary and housing, the main concern of overseas Chinese professors is for the academic freedom to do research and teaching without interference. If there is no or very limited academic freedom in universities, a faculty’s desire and ability to carry out research will be restrained. They will have little motivation to do what they are prepared to do, because they know that there will be many limitations. Under such conditions, students too have little freedom to question and debate teachers; instead, they are required to repeat what the teacher believes and they will only do what the teacher wants them to do. Thus the innovation of students is severely limited. It is clear that if a university does not have strong faculty who can do research, and does not have excellent students who can think critically, it will be very difficult for a university to achieve true excellence. There are two types of academic freedom in America: 1. Individual academic freedom that protects the right of individual professors. 2. Institutional academic freedom that protects universities from interference by government, a right that applies to the community of scholars, not to individual faculty. (Standler, 1999, ¶ 16) Individual academic freedom is the relationship between professors and the university administration. The “1940 Statement of Principles on Academic Freedom and Tenure” promulgated by the American Association of University Professors (AAUP) spelled out the general expression of individual academic freedom. Although this Statement by the AAUP has no binding legal effect, the AAUP can and does publicly censure colleges and universities that they believe have violated the principle of academic freedom. Nearly all major US colleges and universities have adopted this Statement, or a variation of this Statement. The clearest definition of institutional academic freedom in the USA is referenced in a U.S. Supreme Court opinion of 1957. According to this definition, academic freedom means that the university can “determine for itself on academic grounds” : 1. who may teach 2. what may be taught 3. how it shall be taught, and 4. who may be admitted to study. (Regents, cited in Standler, 1999). ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND AUTONOMY Institutional Autonomy Edward Shils (Ma, 2004) suggests that institutional autonomy is the freedom that higher education institutions enjoy as entities not interfered with by the nation, religious organizations, and/or other entities or individuals, such as politicians, government officers, religious officials and entrepreneurs. Academic freedom and university autonomy are the foundations of a modern university. These two principles are inextricably bound together. In the early part of 19th century, Oxford University and Cambridge University had considerable autonomy, but professors did not enjoy academic freedom as individuals. Berlin University, about the same time, had relative academic freedom without institutional autonomy. There are two related and especially important principles concerning academic freedom and autonomy: (1) university autonomy is the institutional safeguard of academic freedom; (2) university autonomy is the consequent extension and result of academic freedom. In Germany, autonomy is the institutional condition that guarantees academic freedom. In 1919, the Weimar Constitution prescribed that art, science, and teaching are all free, and the country should protect and encourage them. Today, the German Constitution prescribes that everyone has the freedom to engage in art, science, education and research. Furthermore, many German scholars suggest that there should also be a system to guarantee this freedom, which would in turn guarantee the autonomy of higher education institutions (C. Schmitt, et al, cited in Ma, 2004). Scholars in the United States are inclined to see university autonomy as the consequence of academic freedom, part and parcel of institutional academic freedom. In Japan, institutional autonomy is regarded as a right protected by the Constitution. Japanese scholars believe that universities are places to do research and transfer knowledge, and therefore academic freedom must be secured. University autonomy secures scholarly academic freedom institutionally. (Tang & Peng, 2000) The Relationship between Government and the HEIs Although institutional autonomy is regarded as the fundamental feature of modern universities, interference from certain governments has never ceased. That is to say, autonomy is relative, and governments have intervened in the operation of universities on a regular basis. Burton Clark pointed out that there are four major modes of institutional co-ordination: political, bureaucratic, academic and market-driven, and that most systems of higher education partake of all four of these modes, though in differing amounts in different times and places (cited in Berdahl, 1990). In countries that enjoy a good deal of academic freedom, interference from the government is often informal, and more in the form of funding, instead of administrative and compulsory order. According to Tapper (1995), university autonomy is always exercised within a political context which, to varying degrees, prescribes its boundaries. Institutional autonomy in the United States is based on the system of a corporation and governing boards. Higher education in the United States is relatively independent of the government and political pressures. Both private and public universities have the freedom to appoint professors, select students, and courses. Private universities have the right to allocate funds in the manner they deem best. Public universities also have considerable freedom to allocate funds received from the government. However, this is not to say that universities are or should be isolated from the development of the country and the society. On the contrary, both private and public universities have an obligation to serve the country. Universities believe that they do not belong to any organization. Instead, they represent the needs of the society, and their mission is to serve society, the people and the nation. For the benefit of the country the government, society and universities together build autonomous university systems. Thus, maintaining institutional autonomy is consistent with the benefit of the country (He, 2006). Higher education institutions in Great Britain were initially related to the government by the University Grant Committee (UGC) from its establishment in 1919 through the early 1970s. However, in order to let universities rely more on market forces, the current Government reforms terminated the UGC and created a Universities' Funding Council which is obligated to operate more on contracts than grants. Through this kind of cooperation, the relationship between HEIs and the government in Great Britain has become more closely connected. Although the relationship between the HEIs and the government is very complicated, in countries those have more academic freedom the government is more inclined to be involved in the HEIs by funding and general policy and does not interfere in the daily operation of HEIs. DEVELOPING A STRATEGY FOR ENHANCING ACADEMIC FREEDOM As has been mentioned above, academic freedom plays an essential role in the development of universities. Only when universities commit to this principle, are they able to achieve great accomplishments. Therefore, if a country or a region wishes to attain maximum economic development, it must do everything possible to develop its institutions of higher learning; and in order to develop higher education, the country or the region must first adopt and protect the principles of academic freedom. Academic Freedom in China Academic freedom was violently attacked during the dark time in China from 1949 to 1976 – the so called “Cultural Revolution”. There was no academic freedom at all during that time, and scholars were restrained from free expression. However, as economic reforms began to be carried out in 1976, academic freedom in China began to emerge. Today, professors in Chinese universities have much more freedom to conduct research and to teach than in previous times. Students also have more freedom to select teachers and courses. Nevertheless, we believe that academic freedom in China is relative, and much more needs to be achieved before Chinese universities can be considered as on a par with the West. There are several reasons why we say this: ♦ Currently, the way that Chinese universities obtain funds is unitary. Normally, only the government appropriates funds according to its own needs. Donations from the outside are limited. Thus, the connection between HEIs and the government is closely related – perhaps too closely related. ♦ Although each university has its own president, the top leader of Chinese universities is typically a political party member – the secretary of the Communist Party of the university. The president is also assigned by the Party and the government. So in reality, the government is directly involved in the daily operations of HEIs. It can therefore be inferred that most HEIs in China do not enjoy full autonomy, which as we have stated is essential to institutional safeguarding of academic freedom. ♦ The status of staff in HEIs is linked closely to certain administrative positions. Excellent professors are also respected, but they usually do not have the right to be involved in important decisions of the university. ♦ Academic freedom has not received judicial recognition in China. China does not have a long tradition of academic freedom, especially since it was completely destroyed by the Cultural Revolution. However, in recent years the government has begun to realize, based on the experience of other countries, that academic freedom can benefit the development of HEIs. Therefore, Chinese universities are beginning to enjoy some academic freedom. Because the Chinese government has been deeply involved in the management of universities, there is no law prescribing that academic freedom is fully protected. Although academic freedom is now given more and more attention by scholars, it has not received enough emphasis by the academy and the government. ♦ The Chinese government has not fully comprehended that giving reasonable academic freedom to HEIs can actually lead to benefit for the development of the region, the country and universities. This might not be the most propitious time to give the same freedoms to Chinese universities as their counterparts in other countries, since there are not any nongovernmental organizations in China that can carry out the many educational functions currently performed by the government, such as evaluation and monitoring. ♦ Today, in China, more and more private universities are emerging, but still there are only a few in comparison to the number of public universities. These private universities cannot be compared with large public universities, whether in terms of size, teaching staff, students or funding. In light of the current situation regarding academic freedom in China, we make bold to offer a few suggestions related to the development and advancement of academic freedom. 1. Investigate the development of governing boards and allow them to make key decisions for the university. Such boards should consist of government members, professors, and other stakeholders, each of whom has equal rights of voting on matters brought before the Board. The president of the university should be the CEO of this enterprise. The government and political parties must be kept separate from the daily administration of HEIs. 2. The government should encourage free and innovative research and ideas in HEIs, and in the case of state founded HEIs, recommend salary increases for professors and staff. The salary level of professors is very low compared to those of other careers. However, since professors can make significant contributions to society, salary increases should be viewed as an investment in China’s economic development. 3. Universities should be able to allocate budgets without interference. Since universities are organizations that can make contributions for the benefit of society, financing of each university should be influenced by the appropriate Budget Committee of the governing Board. 4. Although the political system and social traditions of China are very different from those of Western countries, HEIs in China can learn a great deal from the experience of successful universities in other countries. 5. The government should encourage interaction between universities and commercial enterprises, and also encourage entrepreneurship and spin-off enterprises. We believe that commercial enterprises are the essential economic elements in society. Therefore, if universities can assist in the development of enterprises or carry out successful business activities in other ways, great national benefits will result. Currently, in China, there are still many regulations that restrain such interaction and activities. We urge the government to adopt regulations so as to favor the development of regional economies and HEIs. 6. Heretofore, there has not been any significant nongovernmental organization that can share some of the educational responsibilities of the government. We believe the government ought to encourage the formation and development of this kind of organization to assist in the further development of universities. 7. According to the experience of HEIs in United States, the government not only invests in public universities, but in private universities as well. Private universities will become a strong force in the future, and therefore the government should support their development, which in turn will stimulate reasonable competition among all universities. The government should consider investing in reputable and responsible private universities to help them become stronger competitors of public universities. Limitations of Academic Freedom Academic freedom is not an absolute freedom. All freedoms have some limitations. When people have the freedom to do something, they must also share corresponding responsibilities. The corresponding responsibilities of academic freedom include creating new ideas, carrying on responsible research, serving society truthfully and assisting economic development. Therefore, scholars who desire more academic freedom must be prepared to contribute more to the society, and to the economic development of the region or the country. Most important, whether in teaching or research, all faculty members bear responsibility for adhering to the canons of truth and in sharing the results of their research for the benefit of society and their fellow citizens. CONCLUSION Many studies have demonstrated that higher education and regional economic development are closely related. Properly designed and organized systems of higher education will greatly benefit the development of regional economies. Therefore, we suggest that in pursuit of regional economic development, governments must pay more attention to developing higher education. This should be regarded as a strategic objective of a region’s plan of development. In order to improve higher education, it is most important to realize those qualities needed to create a great university. From examining the top universities in the world, we believe that the principle of academic freedom is most important. Today top universities are located mainly in the United States and Great Britain, but especially in the United States. The higher education systems in those countries are known for their wide acceptance of academic freedom. Not only have the universities adopted this concept, but the governments of those countries recognize this principle as well. Other top universities in Asia, such as Tokyo University and Indian Institute of Technology, have embraced academic freedom. Accordingly, if a certain region or country wishes to strength its system of higher education, it should begin by adopting the principle of academic freedom. We strongly urge that the adopting of academic freedom will eventually benefit both the higher education system and regional economic development. In this paper, we have focused on the current situation of higher education in China, and we believe that Chinese higher education institutions do not enjoy true academic freedom as understood in other countries. Since the leaders of Chinese HEIs are normally assigned by the government, the daily management of HEIs is directly influenced by the government by appointing Party members to become the top leaders of HEIs. In addition, the status of staff in HEIs is mainly based on the administrative positions instead of on academic contribution. To modify this situation, to benefit the progress of Chinese higher education, and finally to promote the regional economic development, we further propose several strategies for advancing academic freedom in China as outlined above. Based on the desire to promote higher education systems in China and other developing countries, and overall development worldwide, our suggestions are intended to stimulate further discussion of the principles of academic freedom and the positive relationship that ought to exist between institutions of higher education and regional economic development in the 21st century. It is our hope that this paper will make a small contribution toward enhancement of academic freedom by once again emphasizing its importance. REFERENCES [1] AAUP (1915), AAUP's 1915 Declaration of Principles, The American Association of University Professors [2] AAUP (1958), 1958 Statement on Procedural Standards in Faculty Dismissal, The American Association of University Professors, the Association of American Colleges Proceedings [3] Allison, Janelle & Keane (2001), Julie, Evaluating the Role of the Sunshine Coast University (USC) in the Regional Economy, Local Economy, 16(2): 123~ 141 [4] Altbach, Philip G. (2001), Academic Freedom: International Realities and Challenges, Higher Education, 41: 205~219 [5] Atkinson, Richard C. & Reed (2000), Charles B., Higher Education Helps Drive the Economy, Los Angeles Times, October 4 [6] Ayers, Brain S. (1996), The Effects of Social Ideology on Academic Freedom, Opinion Papers, Educational Resource Information Center, ED411725 [7] Berdahl, Robert (1990), Academic Freedom, Autonomy and Accountability in British Universities, Studies in Higher Education, 01(01): 0307~5079 [8] Chugh, Ram L. (1997), Promoting Rural Development Through Linkages with Higher Education: A Case Study of the Northern New York, Economy, ED418620 [9] Duderstadt, James J. (2000), The Future of Higher Education in the Knowledge-Driven, Global Economy of the 21st Century, Speech, October 31 [10] ERIC Development Team (1994), Academic Freedom in American Higher Education – Rights, Responsibilities and Limitations, ERIC Digest, ED366262 [11] Fincher, Cameron (1991), Administrative and Organizational Structure in American, British, and Continental Universities, Meeting Paper at the European Association for Institutional Research Conference, ED443304 [12] Goldstein, Harvey & Drucker, Joshua (2006), The Economic Development Impacts of Universities on Regions: Do Size and Distance Matter?, Economic Development Quarterly, 20 (1): 22~43 [13] Gunasekara, Chrys (2005), The role of universities in shaping regional agglomeration: case studies in the Australian setting, International Journal of Technology Transfer & Commercialisation, 4 (4): 7-7 [14] Hulbert, Fran (2006), AURIL Spring Conference 06, Universities’ benefits to regional economy, 2006, available from URL: http: //www.auril.org.uk/press/spring06_hulbert [15] Jiang, JianQing (2005), Comparison between Sino-American Higher Education, Science & Technology Progress and Policy, 08: 156~157 (in Chinese) [16] Jo, Kelly (2006), Universities’ benefits to regional economy, 2006, available from URL: www.auril.org.uk [17] Laukkanen, Mauri (2000), Exploring Alternative Approaches in High-Level Entrepreneurship Education: Creating Micro-Mechanisms for Endogenous Regional Growth, Entrepreneurship & Regional Development, 12: 25~47 [18] Lazzeretti, Luciana; Tavoletti, Ernesto (2005), Higher Education Excellence and Local Economic Development: The Case of the Entrepreneurial University of Twente, European Planning Studies, 13(3): 475~493 [19] Ledgerwood, Grant & Broadhurst, Arlene Idol (1998), Creating Technology-Based Enterprise Televillages Post-modern Regional Development Theory, Cities, 16(1): 43–50 [20] Lin, Tin-Chun (2004), The role of higher education in economic development: an empirical study of Taiwan case, Journal of Asian Economics, 15(2): 355~ 371 [21] Minnesota Planning (1996), A Course for the Future: Higher Education and Economic Development, A Report to the Governor [22] Morgan, Bob (2002), Higher Education and Regional Economic Development in Wales: An Opportunity for Demonstrating the Efficacy of Devolution in Economic Development, Regional Studies, 36(1): 65~73 [23] Moussouris, Linda (1998), The Higher Education-Economic Development "Connection" in Massachusetts: Forging a Critical Linkage? Higher Education, 35: 91~112 [24] Newsweek (2006), available from URL: http:// www.msnbc.msn.com/id/14321230/site/newsweek/ [25] Oldaker, Lawrence Lee (1992), Threats on Academic Freedom in Higher Education, Conference Paper Presented at the Annual Meeting of Education National Meeting, Nov 21, ED377781 [26] Pan, Chaoxuan (2006), My Opinion on How to Establish First-Class Universities, Talent Development, 08: 7~10 (in Chinese) [27] Peck, Frank & McGuinness, David (2003), Regional Development Agencies and Cluster Strategies: Engaging the Knowledge-base in the North of England, Local Economy, 18(1), 49~62 [28] Perorazio, Thomas E. (2001), Social Contract or State Requirement? Economic Development and Higher Education, ED469560 [29] Raelin, Joseph A. (1991), Academic Freedom and Control, College Teaching, 12(01): 7555~8756 [30] Ren, Lijian (2006), The Basic Identity to Create World First Class Universities, Education Review, 01: 4~6 (in Chinese) [31] Robson, Brian, Drake Keith, & Deas, Lain (1998), Report 9 – Higher Education and Regional Development, The National Committee of Inquiry into Higher Education, Centre for Urban Policy Studies, University of Manchester, www.leeds.ac.uk/educol/ncihe/ report9.htm [32] Rosenzweig, Robert M. (1990), Higher Education and Economic Growth, AGB Reports, 32(3): 24~27 [33] Ryan, Oliver (2005), India’s Top Export: Headed Back Home? Fortune, 151(12), 30~30 [34] Standler, Ronald B. (1999), Academic Freedom in the USA, 2006, available from URL: www.rbs2.com/afree.htm [35] Tang, Weimin, & Peng, Wanying (2003), Analysis on the Establishing Institutional Autonomy and Academic Freedom in Japanese Modern Universities, Liaoning Education Research, 03: 58~60 (in Chinese) [36] Tapper, E. R., Salter, B. G. (1995), The Changing Idea of University Autonomy, Studies in Higher Education, 0307~5079 [37] Thanki, Roison (1999), How Do We Know the Value of Higher Education to Regional Development?, Regional Studies, 33(1), 84~89 [38] The National Committee of Inquiry into Higher Education (1997), The local and regional role of higher education, Report of the National Committee, Chapter 12, UK, available from URL: http:// www.leeds.ac.uk/educol/ncihe/nr_189.htm [39] The Times Higher Education Supplement (2006), available from URL: www.thes.co.uk/worldrankings/ [40] Tobin, Brain G. (1997), Academic Freedom, Meeting Paper presented at the English Council of California [41] University Ranking (2005), the Higher Education Research Institute of Shanghai Jiao Tong University, available from URL: http://campus.eol.cn/20050826/3148616.shtml [42] Vernon, Keith (2001), Calling the tune: British universities and the state, 18801914, Histroy of Education, 30(3): 251~271 [43] Vest, Charles M. (1996), Higher Education -A Key Economic Asset, address to Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce, 22 [44] Vest, Charles M. (2006), Federal, State, and Local Governments: University Patrons, Partners, or Protagonists? Clark Kerr Lecturer, University of California, President Emeritus, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, February [45] Williams, R. J. P. (1991), Science in Universities: Teaching, Research, and Autonomy, Studies in Higher Education, 01(01): 0307~5079 [46] Zhang, Fenglian & Jiang, Peiquan (1994), American Experience: The Qualifications to Be World Top Universities, Higher Education Research, 01: 96~99 (in Chinese)
﻿Research on the Defects and Improvement of Internal Control of Scientific Research Funds in Colleges and Universities Based on FMEA Model 
Yan Sun Nanjing University of Science and Technology economic management college Nanjing university of technology institute of management accounting Nanjing, China Email:13365112692@163.com 
Deqiang Deng Nanjing University of Science and Technology economic management college Nanjing university of technology institute of management accounting Nanjing, China Email: ddq001@126.com 
Abstract—At present, the state has put forward the policy of revitalizing science and technology and further improving the management of scientific research projects in universities and colleges, so as to promote the development of science and technology. It puts forward higher requirements for the quality of scientific research project management in colleges and universities, there are some problems in the management of the traditional extensive research funds, such as the lag of the management information system, the low efficiency of the use of funds and the lack of supervision. How to find a scientific method from the perspective of internal control to measure and predict the use and management of scientific research funds is extremely important. In this paper, the FMEA method of risk control is applied to the internal control defects and risk assessment of the scientific research funds in colleges and universities, this paper provides a new methodology for the internal control of scientific research funds, in order to effectively allocate scientific research funds, to ensure the effectiveness and sustainability of the risk management of scientific research funds, in order to better serve the creative activities of scientific researchers. 
Keywords—Research funds; Risk assessment,;FMEA 
I. INTRODUCTION “Several opinions of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council on speeding up the implementation of the innovation driven development strategy ”and “Several opinions of the State Council on improving the scientific research projects and funds management of the central government” put forward the policy to further improve the financial management of the central financial research projects and the requirements of building a dynamic scientific and technological management and operation mechanism. Premier Li Keqiang also pointed out that, to promote decentralization, expand the autonomy of university scientific research project. Colleges and universities are the main force of national technological innovation, it is the main force for the country to realize the science and technology, with the development of higher education, the scientific research projects undertaken by colleges and universities have increased sharply, and the state's 
investment in scientific research funds has increased year by year. With the country to further promote decentralization, put the tube combination and optimization services, in order to reform the management mode of scientific research funds, colleges and universities should follow the law of scientific research activities, in order to reform the management mode of scientific research funds, colleges and universities should follow the law of scientific research activities, improve the management policy, optimize and improve the scientific research funds management processes and methods, adapt to the actual needs of scientific research activities, to create a good environment for researchers to concentrate on research. At the same time, to strengthen the use of funds in the matter after the supervision of serious violations of law and discipline, colleges and universities should conscientiously implement the relevant state policies and regulations, adhere to the same power and responsibility, self-discipline and norms, formulate scientific management methods, regulate financial behavior, improve internal risk prevention mechanisms to ensure safe and efficient use of funds. Therefore, it is very important to find a scientific method to measure and predict the risk in the field of scientific research fund risk prevention and control. 
At present, most of the research on the risk assessment of scientific research funds in colleges and universities stays at the theoretical level, and mostly qualitative empirical analysis, lack of quantitative, systematic and standardized risk analysis and defect improvement methods. Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (the following abbreviated FMEA) reflects the high degree of consistency between the risk control thought and the internal control of scientific research funds. This paper innovatively uses FMEA method and puts forward a method of internal control defect analysis and risk assessment, the steps and methods of risk assessment are given, taking the application of the International Natural Science Fund Project of C University as an example, constructs the internal control defect analysis and risk assessment model of scientific research funds in C University and analyzes the possible risks of the internal control process of scientific research funds in C 
university, and ultimately recommend measures to reduce or eliminate these risks. 
II. THE BASIC STEPS OF THE INTERNAL CONTROL DEFECTS AND IMPROVEMENT OF THE SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH FUNDS IN COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES BASED ON THE FMEA MODEL The FMEA method performs a dynamic analysis of each possible failure mode, calculate the risk priority number RPN (Risk Priority Number) in different failure modes. The greater the risk priority number, the more serious the underlying problem is, and the more need to take timely preventive measures. This paper combines the requirements of internal control of scientific research funding in colleges and universities, on the basis of the basic principle of FMEA, this paper puts forward the "Analysis and Risk Assessment Method of Internal Control of Scientific Research Funds in Colleges and Universities", analyzes the potential risks of internal control of scientific research funds and the defects of internal control, and puts forward preventive measures. The basic steps are shown in the following figure, which will be described in detail below. 
Fig. 1. Basic Steps of the Analysis on the Defects of Internal Control of Scientific Research Funds in Universities and the Methods of Risk Assessment 
A. Sort out the management process of the relevant business 
and draw the flow chart Through the file sorting, field interviews, questionnaires and other forms, access to business description of the first-hand information, combined with existing rules and regulations and management processes, the internal control process of research funding in case colleges and universities is refined and sorted out one by one, draw a flow chart. This is an important part of establishing the internal control system of scientific research funds in colleges and universities. 
B. Identify possible risks and key control points for the business process Based on a general description of the business of internal control and refinement of the process and sorting out the flow chart, identify important risk control points and control 
standards, further refine key control points and standards by mapping matrix diagrams to reflect specific process critical control points and possible risks. 
C. Identify the internal control design and application defects of the business processs By controlling the process of technical analysis and compliance testing, from the absence and the actual improper point to identify design flaws, the internal control of the implementation of the process of running through the test found defects. 
D. Evaluate the severity of the risk of internal control deficiencies in the business process Risk priority (RPN) is the product of S (Severity), O (Occurrence) and D (Difficulty). That is: RPN = S × O × D. Risk severity refers to the extent to which a defect and risk affect the effectiveness of the internal control of the business process. Probability of occurrence refers to the possibility of a defect and risk. Difficulty is the degree of difficulty in identifying defects and risks. The greater the value of RPN, the greater the risk. 
E. Suggestions and measures to improve the internal control A. Case introduction After understanding the basic steps of the analysis of internal control defects and the methods of risk assessment. In this paper, the FMEA method is introduced into the C National Natural Science Foundation of China, and a small attempt is made. C University is a comprehensive "211 Project" University, with 14 professional colleges. C University is not only an education center, or a technology center, with 120 research institutions, a national key laboratories, 10 provincial key laboratories, and built a national university science and technology park, and as a basis for commitment to a large number of major national scientific research tasks, put a lot of discipline construction funds, made a number of landmark scientific research. From the C University department of finance, science and technology department released information, there is no specialized research funding management approach, but in other systems involved. For example, in the "C university financial reimbursement defects of the business process Analysis of risk results requires defects and reasons for improving suggestions and measures, give reasonable advice, and assess whether the improved measures reduce the risk to an acceptable range by RPN and severity ratings. According to the score criteria given the defects and causes of S, O, D, calculate the RPN value, and in accordance with the RPN value and severity level joint to determine whether the defects and the reasons in the acceptable range, and whether improvements and recommendations are needed. 
III. A CASE STUDY ON THE INTERNAL CONTROL DEFICIENCIES 
AND IMPROVEMENT OF SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH FUNDS IN COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES BASED ON FMEA MODEL 
provisions" in the approval authority for research funding provisions; In the process of scientific research activities in the procurement of equipment, with reference to "C University procurement bidding management approach". C university on the work of science and technology have a corresponding development and discussion of scientific and technological work management documents, including "C university scientific research funds management approach", "C university scientific research project management approach", "C university scientific research institutions management approach", "project leader responsibility system" and so on. There are still many sub-processes in the use of the project funds of the National Natural Science Foundation of China, taking into account the use of funds is an important part of control activities can not be ignored, therefore, the use of funds for the process of "travel loans, reimbursement business" as an example of a specific comb analysis. Agencies and departments involved in research funding "travel expenses, reimbursement business" ,including the finance branch, the institute of science and technology, the institutes, the individuals involved are mainly project leaders. 
B. Sort out the "travel expenses borrowing, reimbursement business" management process C University Natural Science Fund project funds used in the use of borrowing or reimbursement. In the travel loan section, first of all, the project manager fill in the application form for travel expenses, and submit it to the college for examination, according to the amount of the loan application is different, less than 20 thousand yuan in the form of loans approved by the leadership of the college entrance examination and approval, 20 thousand yuan to 50 thousand yuan loan approval form issued to be submitted to the Institute of science and technology, and more than 50 thousand yuan loan approval form is required by the finance department, the joint decision of the Institute of science and technology; then, the project leader will pay the application and the application form by the finance department accounting section after the audit into the school's research project management system, and issued a loan voucher, finally, to the Treasury Branch, the project leader receives travel expenses. Travel reimbursement process, prior to the completion of the loan has been approved, reimbursement links do not need approval. And the borrowing links, the amount of different sizes, corresponding to different authority. Funding, reimbursement and related notes are complete, the person in charge of the project to the accounting department for reimbursement procedures, finally to the financial data for the cost of clearing section. 
C. Identify possible risks and key control points for the 
"travel expenses borrowing, reimbursement business" process The key control points in the use of general funds of C University Natural Science Fund: 
Firstly, the approval of the various levels of travel costs of the borrower, approval may not play a role in controlling the authenticity of the loan. Secondly, the finance department may not be in a timely manner for the audit and entry of travel expenses, and the expenditure may not be in line with the 
budget. Thirdly, borrowing information into the system after the check link, the system entry amount may be the actual amount. Fourthly, leaders at all levels of approval of travel expenses reimbursement links, the approval may not have the control of the authenticity of reimbursement. Fifthly, finance department of the travel expenses reimbursement of the audit and entry links, project leaders may use reimbursement for invoices that are not related to research, the expenditure may be inconsistent with the budget and the information is not updated in time. Sixth, Reimbursement information input system after checking the link, the system input amount may be the actual amount. 
D. Identification of the design and application of internal control in the process of "travel expenses borrowing, reimbursement business" It was found that the main problems existed in the actual control activities of the C University National Natural Science Foundation of China: Firstly, the system provides for the scope of authorized approval, but there are problems in the actual operation of the signature approval. Secondly, financial department audit process is not clear. Thirdly, Lack of comparison between the use of funds and the amount of budget setting. Fourthly, login delay. Fifthly, post setting does not refine the division of responsibilities of research funding management. Sixth, the provisions of the system, the implementation of the existing problems. Seventhly, lack of actual notes and budget. 
E. Evaluate the risk of internal control deficiencies in the "travel expenses borrowing, reimbursement business" process After identifying the risks associated with the "travel expenses borrowing, reimbursement business" process, it is necessary to use a certain method to analyze these risks, reference FMEA risk priority number method, risk pattern recognition, through scientific modeling and computational analysis, it will be able to predict and analyze the risks that may occur in the future, risk severity, probability of risk occurrence and difficulty of risk rating criteria are shown below: 
TABLE I. TRAVEL ALLOWANCE, REIMBURSEMENT BUSINESS SEVERITY, PROBABILITY OF OCCURRENCE AND DETECTION RATING SCALE 
Severity Occurrence Difficulty Value 
Negligible P<0.1% Almost certainly 1 
Not too serious 0.1%<P≤1% High 2 
General 1%<P≤10% Medium 3 
Serious 10%<P≤30% Low 4 
Very serious P>30% Scarcely possible 5 
A case study of C University National Natural Science Foundation of China in the process of travel and reimbursement, combining the risk priority index assessment in failure mode and effect analysis, and the relationship between the decision-making table as a basis for selecting the risk of risk, the FMEA failure mode research methods are shown below: 
F. Suggestions and measures for the improvement of internal control defects in the process of "travel expenses borrowing, reimbursement business" Further analysis of the defects and causes not accepted in Table 2, the corresponding suggestions and improvement 
measures, Firstly, clear the approval authority to determine the scope of authorization approval. Secondly, standardize research funding loan procedures. Thirdly, clear responsibilities division. Fourthly, clear the approval authority to determine the scope of authorization approval. Fifthly, the expenditure should be true and standardized. 
IV. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION In this paper, after analyzing the process of FMEA National Natural Science Fund Management in C University, it is found that there are some problems in the internal control of scientific research funds in Colleges and universities of C University. View of a leaf of autumn, other schools also exist these problems. The FMEA analysis method is applied to the management of scientific research projects, and the process of internal control of scientific research projects is fully refined. The establishment of adequate procedures to ensure the quality of the project completion, while avoiding the scientific research funds "die" and other issues affecting the implementation of scientific research projects and results. Really give the university more scientific autonomy, promote scientific research funding to better serve the creative activities, to ensure that the cause of scientific research in colleges and universities to healthy and sustainable development. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Chiozza, M. L., & Ponzetti, C. Fmea: a model for reducing medical errors. Clinica Chimica Acta, 404(1), 75-78,2009. [2] Carbone, T. A., & Tippett, D. D. Project risk management using the 
project risk fmea. Engineering Management Journal, 16(4), 28-35,2015. [3] Doyle, J. T., Ge, W., & Mcvay, S. Accruals quality and internal control 
over financial reporting. Accounting Review, 82(5), 1141-1170,2007. [4] Beneish, M. D., Billings, M. B., & Hodder, L. D. Internal control weaknesses and information uncertainty. Accounting Review, 83(3), 665-703,2008. [5] Li, S. Y. Existing problems and their countermeasure in the management of scientific research funds in colleges and universities.Accounting & Finance,2009. [6] Liang, B., Yuan, Y., Finance, S. O., & University, N. A. Problems and countermeasures on the management of scientific research funds in colleges and universities. Journal of Jiamusi Education Institute,2014. [7] Zhang, A. Research on the Management of Scientific Research Funds in Private Colleges and Universities. International Conference on Electronic, Mechanical, Information and Management Society,2016. [8] Jiang, Y., & Accounting, S. O. Study on the problems of scientific research funds management in colleges and universities.Science Mosaic,2014. [9] Peng, Y. Analysis of scientific research funds management in colleges 
and universities. Value Engineering,2013.
﻿Available online at www.sciencedirect.com ScienceDirect 
Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 167 ( 2015 ) 131 – 140 
1877-0428  2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/). Peer-review under responsibility of Universiti Teknologi MARA. doi: 10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.12.654 
IOSTE BORNEO 2014 
Development of Scientific Research Activity in University: A Position of the Experts 
Vincentas Lamanauskasa,*, Dalia Augienơb 
a, b University of Šiauliai, 25 P. Visinskio Street, LT-76351 Šiauliai, Lithuania 
Abstract 
The formation of scientific research activity (SRA) abilities in comprehensive school is, undoubtedly, a very important sphere, having not received a proper attention yet. Moreover, it has been determined, that in all European Union, Lithuanian people are the ones who are, perhaps, the least interested in science and the least informed about scientific achievements (LMJS, 2008). Such situation stimulates into looking for reasons. The most likely one is, that in comprehensive schools and later on at the university level as well not enough attention is paid to SRA. Without putting the very concept in a frame, scientific research activity is the basic component of developing science education. Thus, constant awareness of this topic is a definitely important issue. Our time requires human curiosity, continuous adaptation to the ever-changing life and active involvement in changes taking place in the society. In this case, creativity, original thinking, self-sufficiency, etc. are the essential qualities (Lamanauskas, 2012). 
SRA should be universally stimulated and developed. Scientific research activity is not an entertainment, but responsible, thorough work requiring a lot of self-reliance. During such an activity students’ analytical thinking gets stronger, the abilities of searching for information and using it are formed; they learn how to analyse the gathered material, to prepare reports, to make research presentations and so on. 
 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/). Peer-review  Selection 2015 2014 The The and under Authors. Authors. peer-review responsibility Published Published under by of by Elsevier responsibility Universiti Elsevier Ltd. Teknologi Ltd. 
This of Universiti is an MARA. 
open access Teknologi article MARA. 
under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
Keywords: Delphi survey; expert evaluation; scientific research activity (SRA); university students 
 Corresponding author. Tel.: +370 41 595736 ; fax: +370 41 595710. 
E-mail address: v.lamanauskas@ef.su.lt 
132 Vincentas Lamanauskas and Dalia Augienė / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 167 ( 2015 ) 131 – 140 
1. Introduction 
1.1. Global and national context 
The 20th century science inventions are changing people’s life and culture. Science helps the humanity to create a more comfortable life, prognosticate natural phenomena, foster humanistic traditions, educate the society, change the society’s development and so on. The Internet, telecommunication and computers have turned the world into global, and Lithuania – the part of it. Chalmers A. F. (2005) accentuates, that three driving forces rule the world today: politics, economics and science. Politics and economics seek for the nearest goals, and the furthest goals – is the sphere of science and academic society. Human thought works in the science field most intensively now; the main part of the intellect’s energy is devoted to science. Science knowledge forms a cultured man nowadays. Science becomes the basis of our century’s culture and progress. 
Science is perceived in a broad sense today. It is treated as a part of culture and a basis of trade, satisfying the man’s material and spiritual demands. Today, it is universally acknowledged already, that in our modern world, technological progress, innovations, knowledge economy are the country’s economy and culture development basis. An obvious relation is noticed between the country development level and knowledge economy part in general economics. The future of the countries, especially those, the natural resources of which are not abundant and the main product is created owing to the intellect, depends on the rapid development of science and technology. Rapid changes in labour market needs, and knowledge becoming the main condition of success in a competition based market economy, raise the new requirements for the abilities of its subjects as well: to obtain such knowledge, which would allow not only to survive, but also to defeat in a competitive struggle. Today, in a knowledge based society, research abilities, owing to which, fundamental and applied knowledge is gained, become the most essential (Lamanauskas, 2003; Hu, Kuh, Gayles, 2007). Therefore, every society today raises new educational goals, seeks to reconstruct its education system so that it could control the innovations influenced by globalization and could prepare the young generation to live in a globalized world and to act in a competition based market economy. In a modern world, the ability not only to master the knowledge, but also to create it yourself and to participate in the society and world change, becomes very important. Young people’s interest in science - researches, achievements, new opportunities, has been particularly accentuated. In order to cognize the present world, and to make competent decisions, one must have scientific education and the ability to control the scientific world cognition method, the creation of science knowledge. Scientific education is necessary today for each and everybody (Pisano, Bussotti, 2013). Students’ scientific research activity (SSRA) is an obligatory, integral part of training the specialists at university (Students’ scientific research activity (SSRA), 2014)). Especially as some students have an early sense of proximity to and/or participation in the scientific research activity, while for others, research remains, through their undergraduate years, a remote phenomenon (Robertson, Blackler, 2006). One can claim that students’ scientific research studies are not only an aim at a higher school, but also a device for intellectual, emotional and practical development. It is obvious, that the development of SRA provides challenges to the university staff, but, on the other hand, they may lead to finding new ways for staff and students to work together (Healey, 2005). 
Though students’ scientific activity encouragement is an urgent problem, however, there is lack of research studies on this problem in Lithuania. A lot of research studies have been carried out, analysing various student preparation problems and urgent things. The research studies have been carried out seeking to ascertain students’ attitude to active learning methods (Petružienơ, Ruzgienơ, 2003), to independent studies (Gudžinskienơ, Šmitienơ, 2003), to professional preparation obstacles (Navaitienơ, 2004), to study programme realization quality (Sirtautienơ, 2006). All of these studies more or less reflect SRA issues. Students’ scientific research activity is determined by research activity competence, acquired during theoretical and practical studies: lecturers’ active study methods’ usage, preparation of a course paper or bachelor work and so on. However, there is lack of exhaustive research studies about bachelor study students’ scientific research competence education in the study process. Despite the increased attention to students’ scientific research activity development in recent years in Lithuanian universities, it is obvious, that the abilities of such an activity are insufficient. Students find most difficult to choose an optimal strategy of a concrete research, prepare research devices, generalise data analysis results and make a conclusion in a research paper and recommendations (Lasauskienơ, 2013). 
133 Vincentas Lamanauskas and Dalia Augienė / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 167 ( 2015 ) 131 – 140 
1.2. Political context 
In the Bologna process Communique (2009), of the ministers Leuven and Louvain-la-Neuve, responsible for higher education, it was foreseen to seek education, research and innovation unity in higher schools up to the year 2020. It was accentuated in this document that all level higher education has to be based on modern scientific researches and their development, in this way promoting the society’s innovativeness and creativity. The main attention in this document was drawn to people, having researcher competencies and to the attractiveness of the young researchers’ career. The number of the inhabitants, able to carry out scientific research studies, has to increase. Besides, the state institutions and higher schools have to seek the career for the young science researchers to be more attractive. Therefore, more and more attention has to be paid to students’ scientific research work ability, critical thinking, creativity and productive self-expression formation. However, it has been noticed lately, that the number of youth, wishing to relate their life and activity with the scientist’s career is decreasing in Lithuania. It has to be mentioned, that it is sought to encourage and activate the students’ interest in scientific research activity in Lithuania. Students’ scientific associations – independent, scientific, public, voluntary organizations, uniting all scientific sections working at university, the members of which – students and lecturers actively participate in the sections’ activity, scientific conferences, discussions and seminars, are being established in universities. Students’ scientific conferences are organized at universities, during which the students present the results of their researches. In some universities, bachelor study students’ scientific practices are organized. 
One of the longest lasting devices, encouraging students’ scientific activity is - the project “Students’ scientific activity encouragement”, carried out with the support of Lithuanian science council and EU structural funds. The main aim of the project is to encourage Lithuanian academic youth to be interested in scientific research works, to reveal the perspectives of the scientist’s profession and the scientist’s career and to create the possibility for the students of different Lithuanian regions and higher schools to get acquainted with the scientific research works carried out in the most famous scientist groups, associations, and centers. During the project, scientific research activity is performed in the course of the study semester; students’ scientific practice is organized in the months of summer holidays. The project is for the 1st and 2nd study stage students (1st to 4th course bachelor and 1st course master study students) to carry out scientific research studies under the leadership of high qualification researchers, according to the individual research program. Scientific research practice significantly contributes to students’ professional development, forming the possibilities to use the knowledge obtained at the university performing scientific research studies and to apply the results in a real professional environment, and more courageously step forward according to the chosen academic sphere. However, the mentioned activities embrace only a small part of motivated students. 
Scientific research competence today is important for many professions and activities: it is necessary not only to creatively apply the obtained knowledge but also to create new knowledge, to carry out the applied researches. Therefore, during the bachelor studies already, the student has to obtain scientific research competence. Scientific research activity becomes the teacher’s educational practice realia as well, allowing the analysis of concrete learning situations, forming the assumptions to think over one’s actions, pedagogical interaction with pupils, allowing making sure of the effectiveness of the applied teaching methods. Constantly changing pedagogue’s activity requires research activity competences. Teacher-researcher - is constantly thinking over his activity, organizing pedagogical activity researches, applying various research methods, creatively applying the research results (Caena, 2011). It is obvious that there is evidence that teacher researcher contributes to teachers ́ professional dispositions, learning, and growth (Nezvalova, 2011). The goal, that the teacher has to develop research activity in his educational practice and to become a teacher researcher is especially accentuated lately in Lithuanian and foreign scientists (Lepeškienơ, Butkienơ, Steevens, Werkhoven, 2001; Pollard, 2006) works and in education strategist speeches and documents (Teacher professional competence description, 2007; Common European Principles for Teacher Competences and Qualifications, 2010). Pedagogue’s scientific research competence has a double meaning and importance: the pedagogue not only himself has to master the scientific reality cognition method, to carry out the applied researches, but also has to be able to guide the learners’ scientific cognitive activity, to make the learners interested and to encourage them to research (Peþiuliauskienơ, 2008). 
134 Vincentas Lamanauskas and Dalia Augienė / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 167 ( 2015 ) 131 – 140 
1.3. Research object and aim 
The object (the focus of the research) is the development of students’ scientific research activity in the university. The purpose of the research is to describe the current situation of organization and realization of scientific research activity, to define essential factors promoting and hindering students’ interest in scientific research activity, to determine lecturers’ competence peculiarities in the sphere of organization and realization of SRA. 
2. Methodology of research 
2.1. General characteristics of the research 
The study employed expert inquiry. The type of expert inquiry is ‘Delphi study’, containing several experts’ inquiries (stages). The data of every round are generalized and repeatedly submitted to the experts. Such procedure is repeated several times, most often 3-4 times. The research went on from October 2013 to April 2014. From preliminary formed 25 expert groups, 16 participated in the research. M. Turoff and H. Linstone’s (2002) recommendations were followed while forming the group. The experts were selected in the group by the random – objective way. The most important criterion was the competence of experts and current research activities (scientific publications, participation in the national and international projects etc.). 
2.2. Research stages and data analysis 
First round involved preparing a questionnaire, which consisted of eight open (in some cases mixed with close- ended) questions: 
How do you evaluate the current situation of university students' interest in developing research activities in the study process? Do you think the Lithuanian universities have favourable conditions for students to develop scientific research activities? Are students interested in scientific research activity? (in addition a closed-ended sub-question was added using the scale: interested very much, interested, slightly interested, not interested) Do you think that current study process is favourable orientating students to scientists, (researchers) career? (in addition a closed-ended sub-question was added using the scale: very favourable, favourable, slightly favourable, not favourable) What factors, in your opinion, hinder educating students’ interest in scientific research activity? What factors, in your opinion, promote students’ interest in scientific research activity? How would you evaluate lecturers’ competence forming and developing students’ scientific research abilities in the study process? in addition a closed-ended sub-question was added using the scale: significant, only average, poor) What would you recommend to change (organize) in the study process seeking to strengthen students’ interest in scientific research activity? After the first round of data analysis, the second stage questionnaire was prepared which comprised closed questions. The experts were asked to distinguish 5 essential factors each- hindering and stimulating students’ interest in scientific research activity (SRA), and to evaluate the statements describing current situation (on a rank scale: agree, partly agree, don’t agree). Analogically, the experts were asked to distinguish five most important suggestions. 
The data of the second stage were processed applying mathematical statistics (ranks were given). Seeking deeper analysis of the data, statistic rank scale rates were transferred into ratio scale and the index of significance (SI)/popularity index which could vary from 1 (“agree”) to 0 (“don’t agree) was calculated for each statement (0  PI/SI  1). The closer is SI value to 1, the more important, more significant is the statement to the respondent, or respondent better approves of it. Qualitative analysis of the second stage was carried out. 
The third stage questionnaire was prepared according to generalized results of the second stage. 
135 Vincentas Lamanauskas and Dalia Augienė / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 167 ( 2015 ) 131 – 140 
Limiting/hindering factors were ranked and once again submitted to the experts to assess and comment upon. They did the same with suggestions. Each of five limiting/stimulating factors and suggestions, experts could comment upon once again. 
Communication with experts was by e-mail. Taking into consideration research ethical requirements, the experts were asked to express consent to announce their names in the study report. The majority of experts agreed to this. 
3. Results of research 
Generalized results of the three research stages are presented here. Generalizing the expert opinions, 21 statements have been distinguished for the analysis of the situation (Table 1). Seeking for more exhaustive situation revelation, the data were transferred into ratio scale and for each statement significance index was calculated. SI is arranged in the decreasing order in the table. 
Table 1. The evaluation of the current situation in the university, enhancing the 1st study stage students’ interest in scientific research activity in the study process (N/%/SI). 
Statements Agree Partly agree 
Don’t agree SI Active cognitive processes are stimulated in the study process: information search, creative result interpretation, reflexion 11/69 4/26 1/5 0.81 Students are being acquainted with the possibilities of participating in scientific research activity 8/50 7/44 1/6 0.72 Study organization form determines students’ interest in scientific research activity 7/44 8/50 1/6 0.68 It is complicated to motivate the students to participate in scientific research activity 7/44 7/44 2/12 0.66 Interest in scientific research activity is, in fact, related only with compulsory tasks (e.g., course paper or bachelor work) 8/50 5/32 3/18 0.65 More often the researches are carried out more qualitatively by “the geeks”, however, there are less of them every year 7/44 6/38 3/18 0.63 Students are not very much interested in scientific research activity 8/50 4/25 4/25 0.63 Students still are rather poorly involved in scientific research activity 7/44 6/38 3/18 0.62 The majority of lecturers have a formal attitude to students’ scientific research activity 7/43 5/31 4/26 0.60 Interest in scientific research activity is limited, fragmentary 5/32 8/50 3/18 0.56 Students study the subjects as researchers, searching for the answers to the questions arising in reality 5/31 6/38 5/31 0.5 Students’ scientific research activity receives a lot of attention in the study process 4/25 7/44 5/31 0.46 Students are involved in research projects 3/18 8/50 5/32 0.44 Universities promote and support students’ scientific research activity 2/12 10/62 4/26 0.43 Students’ interest in research activity is weakened by overloaded study programmes because very little time is left for developing skills, carrying out researches 
5/31 4/25 7/44 0.43 
Students’ scientific research activity is developed very actively in the study process 2/12 7/44 7/44 0.34 The majority of students are interested in researches, in their accomplishment and results 
2/12 6/38 8/50 0.31 
Students have weak orientation, almost are not eager to study, therefore research activity in the study process is only a goal 2/12 6/38 8/50 0.31 Students’ interest in research activity is sufficient 2/12 4/25 10/63 0.25 Students consistently are interested in scientific research activity in the study process 0/0 8/50 8/50 0.25 Students actively involve themselves in research activities at the beginning of studies already 1/6 4/25 11/69 0.18 
In this table one can see, that experts very constructively value the current situation, each expert accentuates certain peculiarities. The statements cover a very broad spectrum of the situation: the peculiarities of the study 
136 Vincentas Lamanauskas and Dalia Augienė / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 167 ( 2015 ) 131 – 140 
process, students’ motivation and involvement/inclusion in research projects, university lecturers’ attitude to students’ scientific research activity and so on. The experts expressed the position, that students start getting interested in scientific research activity when: the teacher himself is interested in it; proper conditions are formed; certain methods are applied (problem based learning, research based learning, cooperative studies and other) in the study process. The experts’ position is evident, that conditions are certainly very favourable for the mentioned activities in the universities; however, it is not enough of time for showing the sense and persuading the students for independent search. 
Having carried out the evaluation of the current conditions for bachelor students’ scientific research activity development in Lithuanian universities, 12 statements have been distinguished. They have also been ranked according to significance index (Table2). 
Table 2. The evaluation of the current conditions in Lithuanian universities for bachelor students’ scientific research activity development (N/%/SI)*. 
Statements Agree Partly agree 
Don’t agree SI Lecturers willingly help the students to choose the research subject that interests them 10/62 4/24 2/14 0.75 Students have the possibilities to take part in seminars, projects, conferences 10/62 4/24 2/14 0.75 There is a suitable base for scientific research activity 7/44 6/38 3/18 0.63 Students are constantly promoted to participate in scientific researches 6/38 7/44 3/18 0.60 Students’ scientific research activity is more “paper” than real 7/44 5/32 4/24 0.59 Conditions are suitable, favourable 5/32 8/50 3/18 0.56 Suitable conditions are not created for students’ scientific research activity 5/32 6/38 5/30 0.5 Lecturers actively promote the bachelors to get interested in scientific research activity 3/18 9/58 4/24 0.46 Universities value lecture attendance more than scientific research activity 3/18 8/50 5/32 0.44 Conditions for scientific research activity are not favourable 3/18 6/38 7/44 0.37 Students’ scientific research work is well organised 2/12 6/38 8/50 0.31 Universities allocate finances for students’ scientific research activity 0 6/38 10/62 .18 *- based on second question 
The results presented in the second table show, that students have possibilities to participate in seminars, projects, conferences, that lecturers willingly help the students to choose the research subject that interests them. However, the results are not very positive. One can claim, that two main factors have a negative influence, i.e., insufficient science and study financing, and inadequate society’s attitude to science. In other words, students’ scientific research activity is not related (or slightly related) with material recourses, it is sought “to make” science without money. 
Having analysed the experts’ positions about bachelor students’ interest in SRA, such distribution has been received (Table 3). 
Table 3. Bachelor students’ interest in scientific research activity. /the situation according to generalized expert group’s first and second stage evaluation (based on close-ended question)/ 
Interested very much Interested Slightly interested Not interested 
5 % 35 % 40 % 20 % 
Distribution shows, that students’ interest in scientific research activity is insufficient. 60 percent of students are practically not interested in such an activity. The majority of experts agree that students are interested in SRA only for the reason that they must complete the tasks (pragmatic attitude). The experts draw attention to the fact, that 
137 Vincentas Lamanauskas and Dalia Augienė / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 167 ( 2015 ) 131 – 140 
these are first stage studies. The majority of bachelors are orientated to practice but not to scientist’s career. On the other hand, the student has the right to foresee the pursued learning result priorities, therefore this distribution, in many experts’ opinion, is positive. 
It is important to evaluate how much favourable is the current study process for scientific research activity development. The results are presented in table 4. 
Table 4. The evaluation of the current study process favourableness, enhancing bachelor students for scientist’s (researcher’s) career. /the situation according to generalized expert group‘s first and second stage evaluation (based on close-ended question)/ 
Very favourable Favourable Slightly favourable Not favourable 10 % 40 % 35 % 15 % 
The results show, that the experts favourably value the study process, the situation is valued more favourably. However, it is partly contrary to the experts’ position claiming, that the students are slightly interested in this activity. This might be related to different experts’ experience, it depends on which study program students the experts work with, how the studies are organized according to these programmes. 
Having analysed hindering and promoting factors, 5 factors have been distinguished in each case. The results are presented in table 5. Table 5. The factors hindering / promoting bachelor students’ interest in scientific research activity*. 
/ 5 most important factors, having received most of the experts votes / 
Hindering factors Promoting factors 
Students’ weak motivation (1) Students’ motivation (1) Improper science and study policy (2) Modern studies, encouraging problem search and 
solution (2) Weak orientation in seeking for scientist’s career (3) The perspective of studies in Master’s course (3) Students do not spend enough time on their studies, because many of them work (4) 
Constant lecturers’ encouragement and support (4) 
Student scientific association inactivity (5) Students’ activity and a wish to try new activities (5) In the brackets the rank is marked, where 1 corresponds to the highest rank. 
In the table, one can see that one of the main hindering factors is students’ motivation. All experts agree with such a position, however, it remains unclear, what determines the weak motivation of the students and for this, deeper researches are necessary. It is without doubt, that student’s understanding and willingness are necessary to take part in this activity; a bigger responsibility for one’s learning results. Lecturers’ role is great, in this case. On the other hand, it is obvious, that the main subject in scientific research activity is the student and sufficient lecturer’s contribution promoting this activity. Study programme is only a device to obtain analytical research skills. Scientific research activity requires consistency, diligence, creativity. Having generalized the experts’ positions, the opinion was approved, that nowadays students (even not working) do not possess these qualities. They choose an easier and simpler way to get a diploma. The experts emphasize, that already in the first study years, the students should create reports, present works, raise problems and propose various problem solution variants. Most of the lecturers actively work in SRA sphere, seek to involve the students, however, the students’ themselves initiative is poor. When the students “get infected with” the desire to research from each other is much more effective, comparing to, when the idea is forced by the lecturers themselves. From managerial point of view, it has to be sought for the studies to encourage problem search and solution, develop research abilities, assure successful person’s action in the labour market and in a public life. 
The lecturers’ contribution, developing students’ scientific research abilities, is very significant. In the experts’ opinion, such contribution is, in fact, positive (Table 6). 
138 Vincentas Lamanauskas and Dalia Augienė / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 167 ( 2015 ) 131 – 140 
Table 6. The evaluation of lecturers’ contribution, forming and developing bachelor students’ scientific research abilities in the study process. /the situation according to generalized expert group‘s first and second stage evaluation (based on close-ended question)/ 
Significant Only average Poor 35 % 45 % 20 % 
However, the lecturers should motivate the students more, because the research works performed by them are rather fragmentary, they cannot see practical applicability of the research results. Very often the research works are not continued, which would end with the bachelor thesis. The students hardly accept that a professional specialist, having university education will have to be able not only to work well with children, but also to diagnose, to value education quality and to scientifically ground it. It makes no sense for them to seek such a level, therefore the lecturer’s role motivating the students has to be much more expressed. The lecturer himself has to be an active researcher and a searcher (i.e., a scientist). 
The obtained results show, that students’ scientific research activity has to be developed more effectively. Having generalized the experts’ positions, 5 main recommendations have been distinguished to improve the condition (Table 7). 
Table 7. Recommendations for the study process organization/changes, seeking to strengthen/make more effective bachelor students’ interest in scientific research activity*. / 5 most important recommendations, having collected most of the experts votes** 
Recommendations Apply modern study methods, promoting critical thinking and new subject search (1) Students should be more involved in the performance of the lecturers’ research works, as assistants, putting data in order (2)** Develop lecturers and students’ team work (2) Include in study programmes more subjects for education of research competences(3) Strengthen SSA activity (4) Prepare more complex science projects, in which students could participate (5) * In the brackets the rank is marked, where 1 corresponds to the highest rank. ** The second and the third recommendations collected the same number of grades; therefore their rank is the same. 
Submitting the recommendations, the experts once again stressed, that the current students’ SRA situation has to be improved, therefore an integrated approach is necessary for changing the situation, and the changes are possible only if there are value changes. The experts think, that very important is lecturers and students’ cooperation in this sphere, more active students’ involvement in this activity. On the other hand, raising lecturers’ qualification, improvement, remains a priority thing. Despite the financial difficulties, the institutions must find the possibilities and form conditions for professional improvement. In their own way, the lecturers themselves, as well, should search for possibilities to remain active researchers. A part of the experts expressed the position, that as early as possible, the students should be given the tasks requiring analytical, reflective, evaluative abilities, because the latter are more accustomed to repeat the information, but not to analyse, “produce” new knowledge. 
4. Conclusions 
In universities favourable conditions are formed for bachelor study students to actively perform scientific research activity both in the study process conducting various tasks, using active teaching/learning methods and strategies, and also participating in scientific projects, seminars and conferences going on at universities. On this basis, favourable conditions are formed to get acquainted with and get interested in the scientist’s career. 
A lot of factors influence the students’ active involvement in scientific research activity: strategy and methods of the study process organization, students’ motivation, lecturers’ active position and a desire to cooperate with students, material base and conditions for the organisation of scientific research activity. 
139 Vincentas Lamanauskas and Dalia Augienė / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 167 ( 2015 ) 131 – 140 
A lot of students practically are not interested in scientific research activity. A pragmatic attitude makes them participate more actively - in the study process the student must accomplish the assignments allotted to him. This evidently demonstrates that students lack inner motivation, interest in scientific reality cognition. 
The main students’ reason for not being interested in scientific research activity is lack of motivation. The students hardly accept the fact, that a professional specialist having university education will have to be able not only to perfectly apply the obtained knowledge in practice, but also in his own practical activity he will have to carry out the applied researches, create new strategies, deeper cognize the essence of professional activity and to control the changes. Scientific research activity requires creativity, insight, responsibility, consistency. Today’s students do not possess these qualities. They choose an easier and simpler way of getting a diploma, the way which requires less time and efforts. 
One can change the current situation only using an integrated approach to the problem (lecturer, student, study process). The lecturers should be interested in involving the students in their performed research works and projects. Lecturers and students’ scientific cooperation should be developed, as a result of which, the students would have the possibility to actively participate in research studies, receive effective support, get experience and see the activity results. This would promote the students’ motivation. In the study process, the students should have to complete more tasks, which would help them master the scientific reality cognition method: to analyse, generalize, systemize, reflect, raise hypothesis and search for the answers. 
Note Because of the article size limit, the authors presented only generalized results of all three research stages. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors thank the experts involved for kindly allowing authors to conduct the study. The authors’ warmest thanks are attributed to the reviewers for carefully reading the manuscript and giving their valuable comments. 
﻿EDUCATION EDUCATION and and SCIENTIFIC SCIENTIFIC DEVELOPMENT DEVELOPMENT 
in OIC MEMBER COUNTRIES 
Organisation of the Islamic Conference 
Statistical Economic and Social Research and Training Centre for Islamic Countries (SESRIC) 
Organisation of the Islamic Conference Statistical, Economic and Social Research and Training Centre for Islamic Countries (SESRIC) 
EDUCATION AND SCIENTIFIC DEVELOPMENT 
IN OIC MEMBER COUNTRIES 
 2010 The Statistical, Economic and Social Research and Training Centre for Islamic Countries (SESRIC) 
Attar Sokak, No. 4, G.O.P., 06700 Ankara –Turkey Telephone +90–312–468 6172 Internet www.sesric.org E-mail pubs@sesric.org 
All rights reserved 
High standards have been applied during processing and preparation stage by the SESRIC to maximize the accuracy of the data included in this work. The denominations and other information shown on any illustrative section or figure do not imply any judgement on the part of the SESRIC concerning the legal status of any entity. Besides it denies any responsibility for any kind of political debate that may arise using the data and information presented in this publication. The boundaries and names shown on the maps presented in this publication do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by the SESRIC. 
The material presented in this publication is copyrighted. By the virtue of the copyright it claims and as it encourages dissemination of its publications for the sake of the OIC Member Countries, SESRIC gives the permission to view, copy, download, and print the material presented provided that these materials are not going to be reused, on whatsoever condition, for commercial purposes. 
For permission to reproduce or reprint any part of this publication, please send a request with complete information to the Publication Department at Attar Sokak, No. 4, G.O.P., 06700, Ankara, Turkey. 
All queries on rights and licenses should be addressed to the Publication Department, SESRIC, at the above address. 
ISBN: 978-975-6427-15-6 
Cover design by Publication Department, SESRIC. 
SESRIC hereby expresses its profound appreciation to the Turkish Statistical Institute (TurkStat) for providing printing facilities. 
For additional information, contact Research Department, SESRIC through: research@sesric.org 
Foreword A 
modern economic human capital and development a formation. good quality education system is and prosperity of any society. It does not only provide a fundamental element in the socio- Education constitutes the core of returns to the educated individuals, but also helps facilitating economic development and growth, and, thus, alleviating poverty and bringing other social benefits to the society. In the light of this understanding, under the domain ―Higher Education, Science and Technology‖, the OIC Ten-Year Programme of Action (OIC- TYPOA) calls for effectively improving and reforming educational institutions in the OIC Member States and urges them to strive for quality education that promotes creativity, innovation, and research and development. 
Within the framework of the implementation of the OIC-TYPOA in the domain of ―Higher Education, Science and Technology‖, SESRIC continues to undertake and initiate new activities within its mandated areas of statistics, research and training. In this context, SESRIC prepared an initial study on ―Ranking of Universities Worldwide and its Implications for the OIC Member Countries‖. This study has been presented at the 3rd Islamic Conference of Ministers of Higher Education and Scientific Research, held in Kuwait in November 2006. SESRIC continues its work within the ―Core Group‖ on ranking of universities, which has been established with the aim of selecting 20 potential universities in the Islamic World to be elevated to the rank of Top 500 World Universities, as stipulated by the OIC-TYPO. In addition to keeping and updating data on universities, SESRIC has also identified and collected data on 33 main indicators on education and education-related fields in the OIC Member Countries. These data are available under the section ―Education‖ in the Centre’s database ―BASEIND‖. 
Our previous report on education titled ―Education: Prospects and Challenges in the OIC Member Countries‖ has been submitted and presented at the 4th Islamic Conference of Ministers of Higher Education and Scientific Research, held in Baku, Republic of Azerbaijan in October 2008. It provides an evaluation of the recent developments relating to the various aspects of education in the OIC Member Countries and includes detailed member country profiles on various education- related variables. It also examines the current World Bank’s Knowledge Assessment Methodology (KAM) ranking for each OIC country along with comprehensive regional comparative analysis. 
In another related area of education, which I believe is very strongly associated with the OIC efforts to enhance the capacity building and the quality of human resources in our member countries, our Centre has developed a comprehensive programme to address one of the most salient developmental challenges of the OIC member countries: vocational education and training. The OIC Vocational Education and Training Programme (OIC-VET), which has been initiated and designed by SESRIC, was officially launched by H.E. Abdullah Gül, President of the Republic of Turkey and Chairman of the OIC Standing Committee for Economic and Commercial 
i 
Cooperation (COMCEC), at the COMCEC Economic Summit held on 9 November 2009 in Istanbul on the occasion of the 25th Anniversary of the COMCEC. 
The inauguration of the OIC-VET Programme marked the official start of the Pilot Application Phase of the Programme. In this context and in its capacity as the Executing Organ of the Programme, our Centre has undertaken several works and actions in order to establish a sound mechanism and infrastructure for the implementation of the Programme. Three pilot projects on various areas of interest to our member countries have already been implemented by our Centre this year. I am confident that, with the realisation of the ongoing and planned pilot projects and close cooperation with the National Focal Points of the Programme and other relevant institutions, the Programme will reach, during the coming period, a wider audience of beneficiaries from member countries and will become a successful model and a brand for human capacity development in OIC Member Countries, which would ultimately reinforce socio-economic development and competitiveness of our member countries. 
SESRIC also undertakes the role of the ―Project Manager‖ for the project of Atlas of Islamic-World Innovation. The objective of the project is to map and evaluate the changing landscape of science and innovation across fifteen member countries. The project is supported by international partners such as the Islamic Development Bank, the British Council, International Development Research Centre of Canada and Qatar Foundation for Education, Science and Community Development. Within the framework of this project, studies are conducting by different research teams in the concerned member countries, in collaboration with potential project partners from government departments, universities, private sector and civil society organisations, in order to explore the current science and innovation climate in the country. 
The present report under the title ―Education and Scientific Development in OIC Member Countries‖ analyzes some of the major education indicators such as literacy rates, enrolment ratios, teacher-student ratio, and government expenditures on education in order to give an overall snapshot of the current situation of the OIC member countries. The report also highlights the state of scientific research and development in OIC countries. It presents an overview of the achievements made by the OIC member countries in the field of research and development (R&D) and science & technology (S&T). It is our hope that this report will contribute to the creation of greater awareness on the current state of education and the importance of investing in primary education as well as R&D for a better future. 
Dr. Savas Alpay Director General S E S R I C 
ii 
Contents 
Foreword ........................................................................................................................................... i 
Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 1 
1. Literacy Rates ............................................................................................................................... 2 
1.1. Adult Literacy Rates ......................................................................................................... 2 
1.2. Youth Literacy Rates ........................................................................................................ 5 
2. Student-Teacher Ratios ................................................................................................................ 7 
2.1. Primary Schools ............................................................................................................... 7 
2.2. Secondary Schools .......................................................................................................... 10 
2.3. Tertiary Schools ............................................................................................................. 12 
3. Gross and Net Enrolment Rates (GER & NER) ........................................................................ 16 
3.1. Primary Schools ............................................................................................................. 17 
3.2. Secondary Schools .......................................................................................................... 18 
3.3. Tertiary Schools ............................................................................................................. 20 
4. Government Expenditures on Education ................................................................................... 22 
4.1. Government Expenditures on Education as Percentage of GDP .................................... 22 
4.2. Government Expenditures on Education as Percentage of Total Government 
Expenditures ............................................................................................................................. 24 
4.3. Government Expenditures on Education per Pupil ........................................................ 27 
4.4. Government Expenditures on Education per Pupil as Percentage of GDP per Capita .. 29 
5. Research and Scientific Development ........................................................................................ 32 
5.1. Human Resources in Research and Development .......................................................... 32 
5.2. Women in Research Activities ....................................................................................... 33 
5.3. Expenditures on Research and Development ................................................................. 34 
5.3.1. R&D Intensity ................................................................................................ 34 
5.3.2. R&D Expenditures per Capita ........................................................................ 37 
5.3.3. R&D Expenditures by Sector .......................................................................... 38 
5.3.4. R&D Expenditures by Source of Funds .......................................................... 39 
5.4. High Technology Exports ............................................................................................. 40 
5.5. Scientific Publications .................................................................................................... 42 
5.5.1. Published Articles ........................................................................................... 43 
5.5.2. The Evolution of Publication Outcome .......................................................... 45 
5.6. Patent Applications ........................................................................................................ 47 
5.7. Knowledge Economy Indices ......................................................................................... 48 
5.7.1. Knowledge Assessment Methodology ............................................................. 48 
5.7.2. OIC Member Countries under KAM ............................................................. 49 
6. Concluding Remarks and Policy Implication ............................................................................. 53 
7. References ................................................................................................................................... 56 
Appendix ........................................................................................................................................ 57 
Table A.1: Literacy Rates ......................................................................................................... 57 
Table A.2: Number of Students and Teachers, 2008 ................................................................. 58 
Table A.3: Gross and Net Enrolment Rates, 1999 vs. 2008 ....................................................... 59 
Table A.4: Government Expenditures on Education ................................................................ 60 
Figures Figure 1: Adult Literacy Rates .................................................................................................... 3 
Figure 2: Adult Literacy Rates by Region ................................................................................... 4 
Figure 3: Top 10 OIC Member Countries with Highest Adult Literacy Rates, 2008 ................. 4 
Figure 4: Youth Literacy Rates ................................................................................................... 5 
Figure 5: OIC Youth Literacy Rates by Region ......................................................................... 6 
Figure 6: Top 10 OIC Member Countries with Highest Youth Literacy Rates, 2008 ................ 6 
Figure 7: Total Enrolment and Teachers in the Primary Schools of OIC Member Countries.... 7 
Figure 8: Student – Teacher Ratios at Primary Schools .............................................................. 8 
Figure 9: Student – Teacher Ratios at Primary Schools by OIC Sub-regions .............................. 9 
Figure 10: Top 10 OIC Member Countries with the Lowest Student – Teacher Ratios in 
Primary Schools ......................................................................................................................... 9 
Figure 11: Total Enrolment and Teachers in the Secondary Schools of OIC Member Countries 
................................................................................................................................................. 10 
Figure 12: Student – Teacher Ratios at Secondary Schools ....................................................... 11 
Figure 13: Student – Teacher Ratios at Secondary Schools by OIC Sub-regions....................... 12 
Figure 14: Top OIC Member Countries with the Lowest Student – Teacher Ratios in 
Secondary Schools .................................................................................................................... 12 
Figure 15: Total Enrolment and Instructors in the Tertiary Schools of OIC Member Countries 
................................................................................................................................................. 13 
Figure 16: Student – Instructor Ratios at Tertiary Schools ....................................................... 14 
Figure 17: Student – Instructor Ratios at Tertiary Schools by OIC Sub-regions ...................... 15 
Figure 18: Top OIC Member Countries with the Lowest Student – Teacher Ratios in Tertiary 
Schools ..................................................................................................................................... 15 
Figure 19: Gross and Net Enrolment Rates, Primary Schools .................................................. 17 
Figure 20: Top 10 OIC Member Countries by NER at Primary Schools ................................. 18 
Figure 21: Gross and Net Enrolment Rates, Secondary Schools ............................................... 19 
Figure 22: Top 10 OIC Member Countries by GERs and NERs at Secondary Schools ........... 19 
Figure 23: Gross Enrolment Rates, Tertiary Schools ................................................................ 20 
Figure 24: Top 10 OIC Member Countries by GER in Tertiary Schools ................................. 20 
Figure 25: Government Expenditures on Education as Percentage of GDP ............................. 22 
Figure 26: Regional Averages for Government Expenditures on Education as Percentage of 
GDP ......................................................................................................................................... 23 
Figure 27: Top 10 OIC Countries by Government Expenditures on Education as Percentage of 
GDP (%), 2008.......................................................................................................................... 24 
Figure 28: Government Expenditures on Education as Percentage of Total Government 
Expenditures ............................................................................................................................. 25 
Figure 29: Regional Averages for Government Expenditures on Education as Percentage of 
Total Government Expenditures .............................................................................................. 26 
Figure 30: Top 10 OIC Countries by Government Expenditures on Education as Percentage of 
Total Government Expenditures (%)........................................................................................ 26 
Figure 31: Government Expenditures on Education per Pupil (US$) ....................................... 27 
Figure 32: Regional Averages for Government Expenditures on Education per Pupil ............. 28 
Figure 33: Top 10 OIC Countries by Government Expenditures on Education per Pupil (US$) ... 28 
Figure 34: Government Expenditures on Education per Pupil as Percentage of GDP per Capita ... 29 
Figure 35: Regional Averages for Government Expenditures on Education per Pupil as 
Percentage of GDP per Capita .................................................................................................. 30 
Figure 36: Top 10 OIC Countries by Government Expenditures on Education per Pupil as 
Percentage of GDP per Capita (Percent) .................................................................................. 31 
Figure 37: Researchers per Million People ................................................................................ 32 
Figure 38: Women as a Share of Total Researchers (%) ............................................................ 33 
Figure 39: GERD, % of World Total (2007) ............................................................................. 34 
Figure 40: R&D Intensity (%) .................................................................................................. 35 
Figure 41: Trends in R&D Intensity ......................................................................................... 36 
Figure 42: R&D Expenditures per Capita (PPP$) ..................................................................... 37 
Figure 43: Distribution of GERD by Sector of Performance (%) ............................................. 38 
Figure 44: Distribution of GERD by Source Funds (%) ........................................................... 39 
Figure 45: High Technology Exports, % of World Total (2007) ............................................... 40 
Figure 46: High Technology Exports (Million US$) ................................................................ 41 
Figure 47: High Technology Exports: 2000 vs. 2007 (% of Manufactured Exports) .................. 41 
Figure 48: The Number of Published Articles, 2009 ................................................................. 43 
Figure 49: Top 10 OIC Countries by the Number of Published Articles (2009) ...................... 44 
Figure 50: Articles Published in International Journals, 2009 ................................................... 44 
Figure 51: Articles per Million People: 2000 vs. 2009 ............................................................... 45 
Figure 52: Top 15 OIC Countries by Articles per Million People (2009) ................................. 46 
Figure 53: Knowledge Indexes .................................................................................................. 48 
Figure 54: KEI Scores and Ranks of OIC Member Countries, Weighted by Population .......... 51 
Figure 55: Over Time KEI Progress of OIC Member Countries, Weighted by Population ..... 52 
Introduction B 
eing formation not the key to create, apply and spread knowledge, education is the core of human capital and central to development of society. The benefits of a good quality education only provide returns to the individuals educated, but it also changes the future prospects of countries, strengthen nations and develop dynamic, globally competitive economies by empowering people. Broad-based education of high quality is among the most powerful instruments known to facilitate sustained economic growth, promote national productivity and innovation, alleviate poverty and reduce inequality. 
Education has long been recognized to play a significant role in the economy, particularly by the so-called New –or Endogenous– Growth Theories, which place education and human resource development at the centre of their explanation for long-term economic growth. These theories have set forth several mechanisms whereby education affects the productivity level, which, in turn, gives direction to economic growth. One of the main arguments is that education, by creating scientists and engineers, is important for flourishing research and development (R&D) activities, which lie at the heart of productivity growth. Another central argument is that education creates human capital, which directly affects knowledge accumulation and therefore productivity growth. 
The development literature, on the other hand, has drawn attention to the role of education in reducing inequalities that exist in many countries, particularly in developing societies with lower levels of income. The high correlation between the level of education and income or wealth is considered from the equity perspective as a justification for public intervention when the conventional market mechanisms do not function efficiently to ensure equality. Therefore, public intervention in the education sector, particularly in primary education, is universally acknowledged today. 
Moreover, education—especially girls’ education—has a direct and proven impact on the goals related to child and reproductive health and environmental sustainability. Hence, it is also fundamental to the world’s attainment of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). 
Because of its critical role in every aspect of life, a good education policy should be established in each OIC member country and it must extend far beyond formal education, encompassing areas such as social policy, health policy and economic policy, as well. However, in order to implement effective policies and programs, better awareness of the present state of the education is needed. In this context, this report analyzes some of the major education indicators such as literacy rates, enrolment ratios, teacher-student ratio, and government expenditures on education in order to give an overall snapshot of the current situation of the OIC member countries. The report also includes a section on scientific research and development in OIC countries, which presents an overview of achievements by the OIC member countries in the field of research and development (R&D) and science & technology (S&T). 
1 
1 Literacy Rates L 
anguage insight, is essential abstract is to fundamental accumulate thought, human social to human structure knowledge. consciousness. and The culture ability Without cannot of using be language, attainable language, higher as both written verbal levels word and of 
written, is called literacy. In a broader sense literacy is a phenomenon by which one can enhance her communication, professional and social skills and it is one of the building blocks for innovation and development. 
As language is fundamental to human consciousness, being able to use it, i.e. literacy, is also one of the fundamental rights of people and is considered one of the important tools for personal fulfilment and empowerment of which 1.36 billion adults are deprived. Not only are those who cannot read or write cut off from their own opportunities for advancement, but society as a whole is also deprived of the potential contributions that individuals can make to the good of all since the positive effects of literacy go beyond personal benefits. It is a key tool to make the workforce efficient and to increase participation of people in society by providing important new skills. The impact of literacy on economic development and poverty alleviation is also positive and can be easily determined by comparing the standard of living, per capita income, GDP, industrialization and development of infrastructure within a country. 
Literacy is also critical for the attainment of other rights as it helps to reduce gender inequality and to enhance political and cultural development. Additionally, the Millennium Development Goals are unreachable without achieving higher standards in literacy. 
1.1 Adult Literacy Rates 
Adult literacy rate is simply defined as the percentage of population aged 15 years and over who can both read and write with understanding a short simple statement on his/her everyday life. With an average adult literacy rate of 70.2%, OIC lagged well behind the World average of 79.6% and even the developing countries’ average of 79.2% (Figure 1). When gender is taken into consideration, it can be observed that the adult literacy rate of males was 77.9% for OIC, indicating nearly 8 percentage points improvement compared to total. However, it was still below the average of developing countries, 85.3%, and the World, 85.6%. For the female side, the gap between the OIC and the World widened to 11 percentage points as out of 100 women only 62.5 of them can read and write while it was around 73 women in both developing countries and the World. 
To further measure the gender differences in terms of literacy, the Gender Parity Index (GPI) for literacy rates would give a quick snapshot of the current situation as GPI gives the ratio of female to male for any given indicator and it reflects gender equality/parity in the area analyzed if the ratio is close to 1. The 15.5 percentage point difference between the female and male literacy rates in the OIC member countries lead to a GPI of 0.802. This means that the gender parity skewed 
2 
towards males and for every 1000 literate men, there is only 802 literate women in OIC while it is 862 and 858 for the World and developing countries, respectively. On the other hand, the high literacy rates for females, 97.1%, and males, 98.5%, in developed countries result in a GPI as high as 0.985, indicating that there is no significant gap between men and women with respect to adult literacy. 
Figure 1: Adult Literacy Rates* 
TOTAL FEMALE MALE GPI - rhs 100 
1.00 
90 
807060500.75 OIC World Developing Developed 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO* The averages are weighted averages calculated by the latest available data of the countries. 
At the regional level, member countries in Europe and Central Asia (ECA) region had succeeded to have an average literacy rate of 94%, which was comparable to that of the developed countries, 97.8%. However, the average would be higher excluding Turkey as more than 99% of the adult population was literate in all of member countries in this region except Turkey having a rate of 88.7%. ECA region was followed by East Asia and Pacific (EAP) with a rate of 92%, on average. Although Latin America (LA) came third as a group, it should be noted that it only reflects the literacy rate of Suriname due to the data unavailability for Guyana. The performance of the Middle East and North America (MENA) region, 74.7%, was close to the world average of 79.2% while both South Asia (SA) and Sub- Saharan Africa (SSA) regions had literacy as low as 54.4 % and 56.6 %, respectively (Figure 2). 
In terms of both female and male literacy, the highest records among OIC sub-regions were also observed in ECA region with rates of 90.1% and 97.9%, respectively. EAP region followed. More than 88% of the female population was literate in EAP and LA, as well. The literacy rate of females in MENA region, 66.7%, was approximately 16 percentage points lower than their male counterparts though being higher than OIC average of female literacy rate, 62.5%. On the other extreme, the illiterate female population outweighed the literate one in SA and SSA regions, as out of 100 women, only around 45 of them were literate. Moreover, the literacy gap between women and men increased to 20 percentage points for these regions, which can also be seen from the lower score of GPIs (Figure 2). 
0.95 
0.90 
0.85 
0.80 
Index Percent 
3 
TOTAL FEMALE MALE GPI - rhs 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO *The averages are weighted averages calculated by the latest available data of the countries. OIC Sub Regions1: EAP: East Asia & Pacific MENA: Middle East & North Africa ECA: Europe & Central Asia SA: South Asia LA: Latin America & Caribbean SSA: Sub-Saharan Africa 
At the individual country level, 26 of the 53 member countries could achieve higher adult literacy rates than the World average, 79.6%. For 18 of these countries, more than 90% of the population is literate and the adult literacy rate is as high as 99% in seven OIC member countries, all of which belong to ECA region, as shown below in Figure 3. With a rate of 98.4%, Maldives has surpassed the average of developed countries, 97.5%, as well. On the other hand, the illiterate population is greater than the literate in 9 SSA countries, namely Gambia, Senegal, Benin, Sierra Leone, Guinea, Chad, Burkina Faso, Niger and Mali where the literacy rates are even below 30% for the last three (Figure 3). 
Figure 3: Top 10 OIC Member Countries with Highest Adult Literacy Rates, 2008* 
Tajikistan 
94.5 
Percent 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO * The figure reflects 2006 data for Maldives and 2007 data for Kuwait and Azerbaijan. 
1 Throughout the report, these abbreviations are used for OIC sub-regions. 
99.7 
Kazakhstan 
99.7 
Azerbaijan 99.5Turkmenistan 99.5 
Kyrgyzstan 99.3Uzbekistan 
99.2 
Albania 99.0Maldives 
98.4 
Brunei 
95.0 
Kuwait 
90 92 94 96 98 100 
Index Percent 
Figure 2: OIC Adult Literacy Rates by Region* 
100 
1.00 
90 
80706050400.64 EAP ECA LA MENA SA SSA 
0.94 
0.88 
0.82 
0.76 
0.70 
4 
1.2 Youth Literacy Rates 
Youth literacy refers to the number of persons aged 15 to 24 years who can both read and write with understanding a short simple statement on their everyday life. When Figure 1 and Figure 4 are compared, it can be observed that the youth literacy rates are strikingly higher than those of adult population meaning that the adult literacy rates would improve in the near future. This is especially promising for the OIC as its youth literacy rate, 82.2%, was 12 percentage points above the adult literacy rate while this difference was around 9 percentage points for the World and developing countries with youth literacy rates being 88.9% and 89.1%, respectively. 
Furthermore, while the literacy gap between the females and males of OIC member countries was as high as 15 percentage points for adults, it dropped to 7 percentage points for the young population (78.7% vs. 85.8%) indicating an improvement towards gender equality in total literacy which is also reflected by increased GPI , 0.918. Meanwhile, out of 100 young people, 86 females and 91 males were literate in the developing countries and the World resulting in a GPI around 0.944 for youth literacy (Figure 4). 
Figure 4: Youth Literacy Rates* 
Total Female Male GPI - rhs 100 
1.02 
90 
807060500.87 OIC World Developing Developed 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO *The averages are weighted averages calculated by the latest available data of the countries. 
As shown in Figure 5, the order of regions in terms of literacy rates remained the same with that of adult literacy rates. ECA region has the highest youth literacy rate, 98.1%, which was nearly at par with the average of developed countries, 99.7%. It was pursued by EAP and LA2 with rates of 96.9% and 95.3%, respectively. On the other extreme, SA and SSA regions had the lowest youth literacy rates around 70%, though this represents significant improvement over adult rates. In terms of female literacy rates, again EAP and ECA regions lead the way with rates of 97% and 96.5%, respectively. Although MENA ranked fourth after LA, 94.8%, the biggest change compared to adult literacy rate was observed in MENA, as the female literacy rate among young population 
2 As no data was available for Guyana, the average for LA region reflects the situation for Suriname, only. 
0.99 
0.96 
0.93 
0.90 
Index Percent 
5 
became 86.8% while it was 66.7% for adult women. This results in a situation towards a more established gender equality reflected by GPIs being above 0.9 for all of the sub-regions of OIC except SA (0.882) and SSA (0.834) regions where the GPIs were 0.882 and 0.834. 
Figure 5: OIC Youth Literacy Rates* by Region 
TOTAL FEMALE MALE GPI - rhs 100 
1.00 
90 
807060500.80 EAP ECA LA MENA SA SSA Source: SESRIC, UNESCO *The averages are weighted averages calculated by the latest available data of the countries. 
At the individual country level, 28 out of 53 member countries could achieve higher youth literacy rates than the World average, 88.9%. In 8 of these countries, the literacy rates were even above that of the developed countries, 99.7% as shown in Figure 6. Additionally, more than 99% of the young population is literate in Kyrgyzstan, Albania, Maldives, Palestine and Qatar. On the other hand, the youth literacy rates are below the OIC average of 88.2% in 17 member countries all of which belong to SSA region except Morocco, Bangladesh and Pakistan. 4 of them, namely Chad, Burkina Faso, Mali and Niger, had youth literacy rates even below 50%. 
Figure 6: Top 10 OIC Member Countries with Highest Youth Literacy Rates, 2008 
99.4 
0.96 
0.92 
0.88 
0.84 
Azerbaijan 
Percent 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO 
* Due to data unavailability, the figure reflects 2007 rate for Azerbaijan. 
100.0 
Tajikistan 
99.9 
Uzbekistan 
99.8 
Turkmenistan 
99.8 
Libya 
99.8 
Kazakhstan 
99.8 
Brunei 
99.7 
Bahrain 
99.7 
Kyrgyzstan 
99.6 
Albania 
99.0 99.2 99.4 99.6 99.8 100.0 
Index Percent 
6 
2 Student – Teacher Ratios S 
tudent teachers education, – working teacher high ratios give the number of students enrolled in a school per the number of at that institution. While low student – teach ratio is indicative of quality student-teacher ratio often gives evidence about proportionately underfunded schools or school systems, or need for legislative change or more funding for education. Additionally, too many students in a class results in a diverse group of students with varying degrees of learning ability and information uptake. Consequently, the class will spend time for less academic students to assimilate the information, when that time could be better spent progressing through the curriculum. It is also argued that the lower student-teacher ratios are better at teaching students complex subjects such as mathematics, chemistry and physics than those with a higher ratio of students to teachers. 
Though it is showed that students attending schools with a lower student-teacher ratio and a better educated teaching staff find jobs more easily and earn higher wages after graduation, some governments could claim that high student teacher ration have no significant negative outcomes. On the other hand, there are countries enacting legislations mandating a maximum student-teacher ratio for specific grade levels to improve quality education. 
2.1 Primary Schools 
Primary or elementary education involves programmes normally designed on a unit or project basis to give pupils a sound basic education in reading, writing and mathematics along with an elementary understanding of other subjects such as history, geography, natural science, social science, art and music. 
Figure 7: Total Enrolment and Teachers in the Primary Schools of OIC Member Countries 
200 
32 
160 29120 2680 2340200171999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 
Percent Millions of People 
Enrollment Teachers Share of OIC in World - Enrollment (rhs) Share of OIC in Developing - Enrollment (rhs) Share of OIC in World - Teachers (rhs) Share of OIC in Developing - Teachers (rhs) 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO 
7 
From 1999 to 2008, the share of OIC in the World increases in terms of both total number of students and teachers in primary schools as shown in Figure 7. In 2008, the primary students of OIC member countries, 186.3 millions, constituted 26.9% (29.7%) of the population of primary students in the World (developing countries) while they accounted for 24.5% (27.5%) of the global total with 157. 3 million students. The OIC shares of primary school teachers in the World and developing countries also displayed similar characteristics and 6.9 million primary school teachers working in OIC member countries accounted for 24.8% (29.6%) of the total primary school teacher population of the world (developing countries). 
As the population of teachers grew faster than total enrolment (21.6% vs. 18.5%), OIC average for student-teacher ratio declined by 0.7 and 27.1 students were taught by a single teacher in year 2008 (Figure 8). Although this was nearly twice the number of students in developed countries, 15, it was only slightly higher than that of developing countries, 26.9, and the World, 25, for the same year. 
Figure 8: Student – Teacher Ratios at Primary Schools 
OIC World Developing Developed 30 
28262422201816141999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 
Students per T eacher 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO 
In the period examined, the number of students enrolled also increased slower than the number of teachers in the developed countries and the World, leading the average student – teacher ratios in primary schools to display a negative trend in general as shown in Figure 8. Having positive fluctuations during the period and increasing by 0.3 compared to year 1999, the average of developing countries was the only exception to this trend 
Among the OIC sub-regions given in Figure 9, only ECA had a comparable ratio, 15.9 students per teacher, with the developed countries. It was followed by EAP with 17.2 students in a class. EAP was also the region where the biggest decline, 23.4%, in student –teacher ratio was observed since the 31.7% change in the primary school teachers employed in EAP region from 1.36 to 1.90 million more than outweighed that of student enrolment from 31.1 to 32.6 millions. The student – teacher ratio in primary schools had decreased in LA and MENA regions, as well, resulting in 21 enrolled students per teacher in 2008. 
8 
450 r 
ehc1999 2008 
a3 .eT640 r 40.e2ps tned30utS20100EAP ECA LA MENA SA SSA 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO 
On the other extreme, the number of students per teacher increased in SA and SSA regions during the period examined. Teachers of SA region had taught 35.5 students in 1999, they begin to teach nearly 7 more students after ten years because the growth in number of teachers, 7.3%, lagged well behind that of total enrolment of students, 27.2%. The secondary school enrolment in SSA region, increasing from 41.7 to 60 million students in ten years, constituted the biggest part, 32.3%, of the OIC total. On top of this, the slower change in teacher population from 0.97 to 1.3 million resulted in the most populated classrooms with 46 students per teacher in year 2008. 
Figure 10: Top 10 OIC Member Countries with the Lowest Student – Teacher Ratios in Primary Schools 
Kuwait 
9.1 
Saudi Arabia 
10.8 
Azerbaijan 
11.3 
Oman 
11.9 
Qatar 
12.5 
Brunei 
12.6 
Maldives 
13.3 
Lebanon 
14.2 
Malaysia 
14.8 
Turkey 
14.9 
4 6 8 10 12 14 16 
Students per Teacher Source: SESRIC, UNESCO 
At the individual country level, Indonesia, Pakistan and Iran accounted for 37.3 % of the total primary students of OIC in 2008 with 29.5, 21.9 and 18.2 million students, respectively. In terms of teachers, Indonesia alone constituted 24.5 % of the OIC total by employing 1.68 million primary schools. Indonesia was followed by Nigeria and Turkey with shares of 6.8% and 6.6%. However, in terms of student- teacher ratio, 6 SSA member countries, namely Mozambique, 
Figure 9: Student – Teacher Ratios at Primary Schools by OIC Sub-regions 
22.4 
19.1 24.2 
23.2 
9 
43.2 
17.2 
15.9 20.7 21.2 
35.5 
Guinea-Bissau, Chad, Mali, Uganda and Burkina Faso had the highest ratios. The typical classroom was populated by even more than 60 pupils in Mozambique, Guinea-Bissau and Chad, whereas it was more than the SSA regional average of 46 for Mali, Uganda and Burkina Faso. On the other hand, ten OIC member countries had lower ratios than the developed countries, 15, as shown in Figure 10 below. Kuwait ranked first with having only 9 primary school students per teacher in a class. 
2.2 Secondary Schools 
Secondary education refers to the programmes at International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED) levels 2 and 3. Lower secondary education (ISCED 2) is generally designed to continue the basic programmes of the primary level but the teaching is typically more subject- focused, requiring more specialized teachers for each subject area. The end of this level often coincides with the end of compulsory education. In upper secondary education (ISCED 3), the final stage of secondary education in most countries, instruction is often organized even more along subject lines and teachers typically need a higher or more subject-specific qualification than at ISCED level 2. 
Figure 11: Total Enrolment and Teachers in the Secondary Schools of OIC Member Countries 
Enrollment Teachers Share of OIC in World - Enrollment (rhs) Share of OIC in Developing - Enrollment (rhs) Share of OIC in World - Teachers (rhs) Share of OIC in Developing - Teachers (rhs) 30 
25 
2422181912166130101999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO 
The number of students enrolled in secondary schools of OIC member countries increased from 87.6 million to 110 million while the population of teachers qualified for secondary schools became 5.6 million representing a 40.1% jump over its 1999 value. As shown in Figure 11, the shares of OIC in the World and developing countries also exhibited a positive trend at the secondary education level under the period examined, though they are lower than primary education level shares given in Figure 9. 
Percent Million of People 
10 
Since the growth in the teacher population was greater than that of students enrolled in secondary schools, number of secondary school students per teacher in the World had a fluctuating positive trend till 2004 after when the ratio began to decline. The group of developed countries was the only exception for this time pattern as the negative trend was evident immediately after year 2000. In 2008, OIC member countries recorded the highest student-teacher ratio, 19.6, on average despite observing the sharpest decline, -10.7%, among the groups compared to year 1999, The students per teacher in developing countries and the World dropped slightly during the period examined and they ended up following OIC member countries with the averages of 19.6 and 18.3, respectively, in year 2008. Meanwhile, a teacher in developed countries had been teaching only 13.5, whereas it was as low as 14.8 students at the beginning of the period concerned. 
Figure 12: Student – Teacher Ratios at Secondary Schools 
OIC World Developing Developed 
23 
21191715131999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 
Students per Teacher 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO 
Among the OIC sub-regions, the student- teacher ratio increased in SSA and ECA, though the average of ECA, 16.1, was still below the OIC average of 19.6 in 2008. On the other hand, the EAP experienced the sharpest decline in the average classroom population from 16.3 in 1999 to 12.2 students per teacher in 2008 mainly due to the jump in the number of secondary school teachers employed from 0.994 million to 1.704 million under the period examined. Although the student-teacher ratio dropped by 6 students, SA region had the highest number of students, 28.7, taught by a single teacher in 2008. With 36 million students enrolled in secondary schools, MENA constituted more than 33% of secondary school enrolment of OIC. However, due to the faster growth of teacher population, a teacher began to educate nearly 3 students less, on average, in MENA 
11 
236 
r e1999 2008 hca30eT7 
r .e84 p.246s 2tnedu18tS1260EAP ECA LA MENA SA SSA 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO 
As shown in Figure 14, 12 OIC member countries had less than 13.5 students per teacher, the average of developed countries. Among these countries, the ratio was below 10:1 in Azerbaijan, Kuwait, Lebanon and Qatar. At the other extreme, Pakistan was the only country having more than 40 secondary school students in a classroom. Additionally, the student- teacher ratio more than doubled the World average of 18.3 in Cote d’Ivoire and Guinea-Bissau. 
Figure 14: Top OIC Member Countries with the Lowest Student – Teacher Ratios in Secondary Schools 
Azerbaijan 
8.4 Kuwait 
9.1 Lebanon 
9.1 Qatar 
9.7 Kazakhstan 
10.0 Brunei 
10.5 Saudi Arabia 
11.0 Bahrain 
11.3 Indonesia 
12.0 Uzbekistan 
12.6 UAE 
13.2 Kyrgyzstan 
13.2 
4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 
Students per Teacher Source: SESRIC, UNESCO 
2.3 Tertiary Schools 
Tertiary or higher education includes programmes with an educational content more advanced than what is offered at ISCED levels 3 and 4. The first stage of tertiary education, ISCED level 5, covers level 5A, composed of largely theoretically based programmes intended to provide sufficient qualifications for gaining entry to advanced research programmes and professions with high skill 
Figure 13: Student – Teacher Ratios at Secondary Schools by OIC Sub-regions 
16.3 
15.8 17.6 
12 
24.8 
34.9 
24.8 12.2 16.1 17.2 22.0 
requirements; and level 5B, where programmes are generally more practical, technical and/or occupationally specific. The second stage of tertiary education, ISCED level 6, comprises programmes devoted to advanced study and original research, and leading to the award of an advanced research qualification. 
Figure 15: Total Enrolment and Instructors in the Tertiary Schools of OIC Member Countries 
Enrollment Teachers Share of OIC in World - Enrollment (rhs) Share of OIC in Developing - Enrollment (rhs) Share of OIC in World - Teachers (rhs) Share of OIC in Developing - Teachers (rhs) 30 
25 
2422181912166130101999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO 
Looking from the enrolment side, the number of students in tertiary schools increased more than 70%, from 14.3 to 24.4 million, in OIC member countries (Figure 15). Since more graduates of higher education means more qualified, highly skilled workforce, this is especially promising for OIC. However, the picture is not so optimistic in terms of shares: The population of tertiary school students in OIC member countries accounted for 21.5% of that of developing countries in 2008 while it was nearly 3 percent higher in 1999. Additionally, the share of OIC in the total enrolment of the World remained nearly stagnant and exhibited only a slight rise from 15.3% to 15.7% under the period of concern. So, although the total number of students at higher education increased, OIC member countries could not catch up with the growth rate of the developing countries, 92%, on average. 
Meanwhile, OIC member countries employed 1.44 million instructors for tertiary3 schools indicating a 48.3% change over 1999 employment of 0.77 million people. In terms of shares, the picture looks similar: Declining by more than 3 percentage points compared to year 1999, OIC population of tertiary school teachers constituted 18.2% of the developing countries while its global share exhibited only a small regression from 12.4% in 1999 to 11.8% in 2008 (Figure 15). 
3 The definition and content of tertiary schools may change from country to country. 
Percent Million of People 
13 
OIC World Developing Developed 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO 
Students per Teacher 
11131517192123 
As lower student-teacher ratios are generally considered to indicate quality education, it is striking to observe a positive trend for student-instructor ratios at tertiary level schools globally in Figure 16, though the number of students per teacher had displayed a negative trend for primary and secondary schools in Figures 8 and 12. The only exception to this trend was developed countries where an instructor began to teach 12.2 tertiary level students in 2008 while it was one student more in 1999. The rise in ratios means that sufficient number of instructors do not enter in the education market to catch the growth rate of tertiary level student number so as to enhance the quality of education by decreasing the number of students per instructor. 
Among the groups, the widest gap between growth rates of students’ and teachers’ population (70.3% for students vs. 48.3% for instructors) was in OIC member countries. Consequently, the highest rise in student-instructor ratio was observed for OIC member countries, on average, and an instructor began to teach 21.3 students in 2008 while it was 18.5 in 1999, as given in Figure 16. Despite a downward spike in year 2005, the average classroom in the world (developing countries) had nearly 1(2) more students per instructor compared to year 1999, as well. 
From Figure 17, it is evident that SSA sub-region of OIC had the biggest change and the student- teacher ratio more than doubled compared to year 1999. This was caused by negative growth of in teachers’ population, -5.3%, when the number of students enrolled increased by 98% from 1.28 to 2.53 millions. Although SA recorded the highest increase in the magnitude of 38.4%, following SSA, the regional average of student-instructor ratio, 19, was still below the OIC average of 21.3 in 2008. During the period examined, EAP and ECA regions also experienced increases in the number of students enrolled per instructor, though being small. LA and MENA were the only OIC sub-regions where the student density of classrooms decreased primarily due to rapid growth of teacher population in these regions. MENA case is especially important since with 10.2 million students enrolled and 423 thousand teachers working in tertiary schools, MENA accounted for 41.8% and 32.6% of the OIC total tertiary enrolment and teacher populations, respectively. 
Figure 16: Student – Instructor Ratios at Tertiary Schools 
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 
14 
340 
r e1999 2008 
h6 
c.a8eT32r eps tne24dutS1680EAP ECA LA MENA SA SSA 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO 
At the individual country level, 3 countries only, namely Indonesia, Iran and Turkey, inhabited 42.5% of 24.4 million tertiary school students of OIC with shares of 18.2%, 13.9% and 10.4% in year 2008. Similarly, 46.2% of OIC total instructor workforce was employed in these countries. 
Figure 18: Top OIC Member Countries with the Lowest Student – Teacher Ratios in Tertiary Schools 
Maldives 
1.9 Sierra Leone 
11.3 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 
Students per Instructor Source: SESRIC, UNESCO 
However, in terms of student-instructor ratios, OIC member countries exhibited great variations over a wide scale. On the one side, an instructor taught as high as 148 tertiary level students in Guinea – Bissau while the average classroom had 2 students per instructor in Maldives. 22 member countries had higher student-instructor ratios than the OIC average of 21.3. Among them, Mali, Togo and Sudan had the most crowded tertiary school classes with 68.7, 67.2 and 43.4 students, respectively. On the contrary, 11 member countries given in Figure 18 had student-instructor ratios less than that of the developed countries’ average, 12.3. 
7.4 Mozambique 
8.0 Brunei 
8.1 Lebanon 
8.4 Guyana 
9.0 Azerbaijan 
9.3 Suriname 
9.4 Qatar 
11.3 Gambia 
11.3 Chad 
Figure 17: Student – Instructor Ratios at Tertiary Schools by OIC Sub-regions 
13.6 18.3 
11.7 
25.1 
13.7 18.5 
14.0 
15 
20.2 
9.1 
24.0 
19.0 
3 Gross and Net Enrolment Rates (GER & NER) G 
ross students a given Enrolment level of a of particular education. Rates age (GERs) Technically, groups indicate and are GERs used the give to capacity show the total the of general enrolment education level in system participation a specific to enrol in level of education, regardless of age, expressed as a percentage of the eligible official school-age population corresponding to the same level of education in a given school year except for the tertiary level where the population used is that of the five-year age group following on from the secondary school leaving. As it is calculated regardless of age, it also indicates the extent of over aged and under aged enrolment by being above 100%. 
A high GER generally indicates a high degree of participation, whether the pupils belong to the official age group or not. A GER value approaching or exceeding4 100% indicates that a country is, in principle, able to accommodate all of its school-age population, but it does not indicate the proportion already enrolled. The achievement of a GER of 100% is therefore a necessary but not sufficient condition for enrolling all eligible children in school. When the GER exceeds 90% for a particular level of education, the aggregate number of places for pupils is approaching the number required for universal access of the official age group. However, this is a meaningful interpretation only if one can expect the under-aged and over-aged enrolments to decline in the future to free places for pupils from the expected age group. 
Net Enrolment Rates (NETs) give the total enrolment of the official age group for a given level of education expressed as a percentage of the corresponding population and are used to show the extent of coverage in a given level of education of children and youths belonging to the official age group corresponding to the given level of education. 
A high NER denotes a high degree of coverage for the official school-age population. The theoretical maximum value is 100%. Increasing trends can be considered as reflecting improving coverage at the specified level of education. When the NER is compared with the GER, the difference between the two highlights the incidence of under-aged and over-aged enrolment. If the NER is below 100%, then the complement, i.e. the difference with 100%, provides a measure of the proportion of children not enrolled at the specified level of education. However, since some of these children/youth could be enrolled at other levels of education, this difference should in no way be considered as indicating the percentage of students not enrolled. 
4 GER can exceed 100% due to the inclusion of over-aged and under-aged pupils/students because of early or late entrants, and grade repetition. In this case, a rigorous interpretation of GER needs additional information to assess the extent of repetition, late entrants, etc. 
16 
3.1 Primary Schools 
From Figure 19, it is evident that the averages5 Gross Enrolment Ratios (GER) in primary schools increased all over the world except the developed countries for the period examined. This upward trend was especially striking for the OIC average as the positive momentum caught led to a remarkable 10-point increase from 89.6% in 1999 to 99.9% in 2008. Meanwhile, the GER of developing countries and the world surpassed 100% and reached 104% in year 2008 while it was around 103% for developed countries indicating a slight decline compared to year 1999. 
In line with GERs, Net Enrolment Rates (NERs) also displayed a positive trend globally. The average NER of the World increased by 3.8 percentage points and became 87.8% in 2008 while 86% of the primary school students enrolled in developing countries after 4.5 percentage points change compared to year 1999. Among the groups, OIC member countries experienced the highest increase of NER from 76.8% in 1999 to 81.8% in 2008. This indicates that nearly 18.2% of primary school age students in OIC member countries were not enrolled in primary schools whereas it was only 3% in developed countries. 
When GERs are compared with NERs, the developed countries had the narrowest gap, approximately 6 percentage points, between the straight and dotted lines, reflecting the low incidence of under/over-aged enrolment. On the other hand, the gap was as high as 16% in the World and 18% in OIC and developing countries for year 2008. 
Figure 19: Gross and Net Enrolment Rates, Primary Schools 
95 90858075OIC - GER World - GER Developing - GER Developed - GER OIC - NER World - NER Developing - NER Developed - NER 105 
100 
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO 
5 Due to inconsistencies regarding population and enrolment, the averages are simple, unless otherwise is noted. 
Percent 
17 
As GERs of 30 OIC member countries were above 100%6 in 30 OIC member countries, NERs would present a clearer picture at the individual country level. 27 OIC member countries achieved higher NERs than the World average of 87.8% in year 2008. As shown in Figure 20, the NERs of Iran, Bahrain, Tunisia, Tajikistan and Uganda, were even above that of the developed countries, 97%. At the other extreme, more than half of the primary school age students were not enrolled in primary schools in Niger, Djibouti and Sudan. 
Figure 20: Top 10 OIC Member Countries by NER at Primary Schools 
Iran 
94.9 
Percent 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO 
3.2 Secondary Schools 
The GERs at secondary schools displayed similar characteristics with GERs at primary schools and increase all over the world excluding developed countries where the GER dropped by nearly 2 percentage points over its 1999 rate of 106.1% (Figure 21). 
Among the groups, the highest jump in GER was observed in OIC member countries from 50% in 1999 to 60.4% in 2008. In terms of change, developing countries followed OIC. In 2008, 68.6% of students were covered under the secondary school system of developing countries., indicating an increase around 8.8 percentage points compared to year 1999.However, the GER of developing countries continued to be below that of the World, 74.6%, in 2008 
Although the NERs, shown by the dotted lines in Figure 21, were lower than the GERs of the respective groups due to the under/over-age enrolment, more than 90% of secondary school age students in developed countries were enrolled in 2008. On the other hand, the NERs of neither the OIC member countries nor the developing countries could manage to overcome the World average of 64.7% , despite upward trend during the period analyzed. More strikingly, the OIC average for NER, 52.7%, revealed that nearly half of the secondary school age students were not enrolled in the secondary schools of OIC member countries in year 2008. 
6 GERs of Sierra Leone, Gabon, Iran, Syria and Uganda were even above 120%. 
99.7 
Bahrain 
97.9 
Tunisia 97.7Tajikistan 
97.3Uganda 97.1Maldives 
96.2 
Malaysia 
96.1 
Azerbaijan 
96.0 
Indonesia 
95.7Algeria 
93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 
18 
OIC - GER World - GER Developing - GER Developed - GER OIC - NER World - NER Developing - NER Developed - NER 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO 
At the individual country level, 25 OIC member countries achieved higher GERs at secondary schools than the World average of 74.6%, In 117 of them,, six belonging to MENA region, more than 90% of students of the comparative age group were enrolled in secondary schools (Figure 22- A). Azerbaijan, Guyana and Uzbekistan had GERs even over 100% with rates of 105.6%, 102.1% and 101.4%, respectively while less than one fifth of students enrolled in secondary schools in Chad, Burkina Faso, Niger and Somalia. 
Figure 22: Top 10 OIC Member Countries by GERs and NERs at Secondary Schools Part A) GERs Part B) NERs 
Azerbaijan 
Azerbaijan 
85.4 
83.882.581.992.0 
Percent 80.5Percent 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO 
With the exception of Guyana of Figure 22-A, the first four positions in terms of net enrolment were shared by the same countries, Azerbaijan, Uzbekistan, Bahrain and Brunei. (Figure 22-B) 
7 In addition to top 10 countries listed in Figure 22, Tunisia surpassed the average of developed countries with a GER of 91.8%. 
105.6 
90 92 94 96 98 100 102 104 106 
98.3 
Guyana 
102.1 
Uzbekistan 
91.3 
Uzbekistan 
101.4 
Bahrain 
89.4 
Bahrain 
96.8 
Brunei 88.2Brunei 
96.7 
Palestine 87.3Saudi Arabia 
94.6 
Kazakhstan 
UAE 
93.8UAE 
Libya 
93.5 
Tajikistan 
Qatar 
93.2 
Jordan 
Kazakhstan 
Kyrgyzstan 
75 80 85 90 95 100 
Percent 
Figure 21: Gross and Net Enrolment Rates, Secondary Schools 
110 
100 
90 
80706050401999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 
19 
Azerbaijan and Uzbekistan were the only OIC member countries having NERs higher than the average of developed countries, 90.5%. 
3.3 Tertiary Schools 
For tertiary education, net enrolment rate is not pertinent because of the difficulties in determining an appropriate age group due to the wide variations in the duration of programmes at this level of education. In terms of gross enrolment in tertiary schools, with a rate of 17.1 % in 2008, the OIC average was below that of developing countries, 23.9% and nearly half of the world, 30.8 %. 
Figure 23: Gross Enrolment Rates, Tertiary Schools 
OIC - GER World - GER Developing - GER Developed - GER 65 
554535251551999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 
Percent 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO 
Additionally, OIC member countries experienced the lowest growth trend as can be seen in Figure 23 whereas the average GER of developed countries increased from 49.1% in 1999 to 63.7% in 2008. 
Figure 24: Top 10 OIC Member Countries by GER in Tertiary Schools 
Libya 
40.7 
38.436.133.732.1Percent 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO 
55.7 
Kyrgyzstan 
52.0 
Lebanon 
51.5 
Palestine 
47.2 
Kazakhstan 
46.9 
Jordan 
Turkey 
Iran 
Tunisia 
Malaysia 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 
20 
In 2008, 10 OIC member countries achieved higher GER in tertiary schools than the World average of 30.8%, as shown in Figure 24. Among them, Libya, Kyrgyzstan and Lebanon obtained the first three positions as more than half of the tertiary school age students were enrolled in tertiary schools in these countries. On the other hand, there were 128 member countries where the enrolment rates in tertiary schools were even below 5 %. 
8 Except Afghanistan, all of them belonged to SSA region. 
21 
4 Government Expenditures on Education T 
he and not outcome only equality the of as provision the well research as the but need placing also for the utmost public financing importance intervention of education to in education education by the states. for has economic implications In this respect, growth for 
this section of the Report analyzes the levels of government expenditures on education in OIC countries in comparison with their counterparts for the period 1999-2008. 
4.1 Government Expenditures on Education as Percentage of GDP 
One way to analyze the size of public expenditures on education is to compare these expenditures with the gross domestic product (GDP) of an economy, which, in one way, represents the total expenditures in that economy. Thus, it can be calculated how much of the GDP is dedicated to education sector by the government. The measure used to calculate this ratio is ―government expenditures on education as percentage of GDP‖. This indicator is also a sign of the importance given by the government to investment in human resources. 
As shown in Figure 25, governments around the world spent, on average, 4.0% of GDP on education in 1999 while this figure slightly increased by 0.1 percentage point in a decade to reach 4.1% in 2008. Developed countries had been spending more than developing countries. Public spending on education in developed countries accounted for 4.3% of the GDP in 1999 and this ratio increased further to 4.5% by 2008. However, governments in developing countries could spend only 2.8% of their GDP on the education sector in 1999 and this ratio increased only by 0.1 percentage points in a decade to reach 2.9% in 2008. 
Figure 25: Government Expenditures on Education as Percentage of GDP* 
5.0 
t ne1999 2008 cr4.5 
eP4.0 
4.5 
3.5 
3.0 
2.5 
2.9 2.6 2.0 
1.5 
1.0 
0.5 
0.0 
World Developed Developing OIC 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO *The averages are weighted averages for countries with available data. 
The situation in OIC countries was not optimistic though government spending on education accounted for 2.9% of their GDP in 1999, which was higher than the average for developing 
4.0 
4.1 
4.3 
2.8 2.9 
22 
countries at that time, this ratio declined down to 2.6% by 2008. It is obvious that the public spending on education sector with respect to the size of the economy was, on average terms, lower in OIC countries than in both developed and developing countries (Figure 25). 
Figure 26 demonstrates the regional averages of government expenditures on education as percentage of GDP for OIC countries in comparison with all countries for the years 1999 and 2008. Accordingly, this ratio for members in EAP outperformed the regional average significantly in 1999 –8.5% vs. 3.4%, respectively– and, although it declined to 3.8% by 2008, it was still higher than the regional average of 3.3%. The ratio for OIC countries in ECA increased from 2.6% to 14.0% in this period. Thus, although it was lower than the regional average of 3.9% in 1999, it exceeded the regional average of 4.1% significantly by 2008. The ratio for members in LA region declined from 6.3% to 6.1% in this period, yet it still remained higher than the respective regional averages of 3.7% and 4.4%. The ratio for the members in MENA did not change remarkably, declining from 1.6% to 1.5%, but it remained below the regional averages of 2.2% in 1999 and 1.9% in 2008. The ratio continued to be the lowest in the OIC for member countries in SA as it further declined from 1.3% to 0.8% in the period under consideration. Moreover, these figures were significantly lower than the regional averages of 3.8% in 1999 and 2.6% in 2008. The ratio for members in SSA outperformed the regional average in 1999 –4.7% vs. 2.6%, respectively– and, although it declined to 2.9% by 2008, it was still higher than the regional average of 1.8%. 
Figure 26: Regional Averages for Government Expenditures on Education as Percentage of GDP 
216 
t 1999 2008 ne14creP1210869 
4.20EAP ECA LAC MENA SA SSA EAP ECA LAC MENA SA SSA 
All Countries OIC Countries 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO * The averages are weighted averages for countries with available data. 
Time wise analysis indicates that OIC countries in all the regions except in ECA witnessed a decline in their ratio of government expenditures on education to GDP between 1999 and 2008 and the decline was more notable for members in EAP (from 8.5% to 3.8%) and in SSA (from 4.7% to 2.9%). As of 2008, the highest rate of government expenditure on education as percentage of GDP was recorded for members in ECA (14.0%), followed by members in LA (6.1%), EAP (3.8%), SSA (2.9%), and SA (0.8%). Considering the comparison between the regional averages for OIC 
3.4 3.9 3.7 
2.2 
23 
3.8 
2.6 
4.7 3.3 4.1 4.4 
1.9 2.6 
1.8 
3.8 
8.5 
2.6 
6.3 
1.6 
1.3 
14.0 
6.1 
1.5 
0.8 
countries and the overall averages for their respective regions, the averages for member countries in EAP, ECA, LA and SSA exceeded the overall regional averages. 
At the individual country level, government spending on education accounted for 8.7% of the GDP in Djibouti, which was the highest rate among the OIC countries with available data as of 2008.Together with Djibouti, Maldives (8.1%), Comoros (7.6%), Tunisia (7.2%), Kyrgyzstan (6.6%), Guyana (6.1%), Saudi Arabia (5.7%), Morocco (5.7%), Yemen (5.2%), and Senegal (5.1%) comprised the top 10 OIC countries by government expenditures on education as percentage of GDP (Figure 27). It is noteworthy that all these countries except Saudi Arabia are low-income or lower-middle-income countries according to their GNI per capita. 
Figure 27: Top 10 OIC Countries by Government Expenditures on Education as Percentage of GDP (%), 2008* 
Djibouti 
Maldives 
Comoros 
Tunisia 
Kyrgyzstan 
Guyana 
Saudi Arabia 
Morocco 
Yemen 
Senegal 
Percent 
8.7 
5.15.2 
5.15.2 
5.15.2 
5.7 
5.7 
6.1 
6.6 
7.2 
7.6 
8.1 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO *Due to data unavailability, the figure reflects 2007 values for Djibouti, Tunisia, Kyrgyzstan and Guyana. 
4.2 Government Expenditures on Education as Percentage of Total Government Expenditures 
The share of a government’s spending on education in its total expenditures is another major indicator that measures the relative importance of the education sector on part of the government. The higher the share of education expenditures in total government expenditures, the higher is the government’s support for the education sector. 
The share of government expenditures on education in total government expenditures was higher in OIC member countries than in both developed and developing countries in the period under consideration (Figure 28). It implies that the governments in OIC member countries, on average, have spent on the education sector proportionally more than the governments in both developed and developing countries have done. In OIC member countries, governments’ spending on the education sector accounted for 16.4% of their total expenditures in 1999. This ratio was 13.0% in developed countries and 14.5% in developing countries, with the world average being 13.2%. By 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
24 
2008, the ratio increased to 16.9% in OIC member countries and 15.6% in developing countries while it declined to 12.2% in developed countries, leading to a decline in the world average to 12.7% Figure 28: Government Expenditures on Education as Percentage of Total Government Expenditures 
16.9 18 
t n1999 2008 ecr16eP14121086420World Developed Developing OIC 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO * The averages are weighted averages for countries with available data. 
Figure 29 shows the regional averages of government expenditures on education as percentage of total government expenditures for OIC countries in comparison with all countries for the years 1999 and 2008. The ratio for OIC members in EAP region surpassed the regional average both in 1999 (16.0% vs. 10.8%, respectively) and in 2008 (18.4% vs. 11.9%, respectively). For OIC countries in ECA, it increased from 10.7% to 13.5% in this period. Thus, although it was slightly lower than the regional average of 11.0% in 1999, it exceeded the regional average of 11.2 percent by 2008. The ratio for members in LA declined significantly in this period, from 18.4% to 12.5%, though the regional average increased from 14.3% to 17.4%. The ratio for the members in MENA also declined, from 20.3% to 18.4%, yet it still remained below the regional averages of 18.9% in 1999 and 17.7% in 2008. The ratio continued to be the lowest in the OIC for member countries in SA despite the fact that it increased from 8.0% to 11.9% in the period under consideration. However, although the average for these countries was significantly lower than the regional average of 11.8% in 1999, it even slightly exceeded the regional average of 11.1% in 2008. The ratio for members in SSA increased from 16.6% to 18.5% in this period, though the regional average decreased from 20.2% to 17.3%, implying that the average for these OIC countries outperformed the regional average at the end of the period under consideration. 
Overall, time wise analysis indicates that, unlike the member countries in LA and MENA regions, those in EAP, ECA, SA and SSA witnessed an increase in their ratio of government expenditures on education to total government expenditures between 1999 and 2008. Consequently, as of 2008, the highest rate of government expenditure on education as percentage of total government expenditures was recorded for members in SSA (18.5%), followed by members in EAP (18.4%), 
16.4 
12.7 12.2 
15.6 
13.2 13.0 
25 
14.5 
MENA (18.4%), ECA (13.5%), LA (12.5%), and SA (11.9%). Considering the comparison between the regional averages for OIC countries and the overall averages for their respective regions, it is observed that the averages for member countries in all the regions except LA exceeded the overall regional averages (Figure 29). 
Figure 29: Regional Averages for Government Expenditures on Education as Percentage of Total Government Expenditures 
Percent 1999 2008 
18.5 0510152025 
10.8 11.0 
16.6 
11.9 
11.9 
11.2 
11.2 
11.2 
14.3 
18.9 
11.8 
11.8 
11.8 
11.8 
17.4 17.7 
17.4 17.7 
11.1 
11.1 
11.1 
11.1 
11.1 
20.2 
20.2 
16.0 
16.0 
10.7 
10.7 
10.7 
10.7 
10.7 
17.3 18.4 
17.3 18.4 
17.3 18.4 
13.5 
13.5 
12.5 
12.5 
12.5 
12.5 
18.4 20.3 
18.4 20.3 
18.4 20.3 
8.0 
18.4 
18.4 
18.4 
18.4 
11.9 
11.9 
11.9 
11.9 
11.9 
11.9 
11.9 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO * The averages are weighted averages for countries with available data. 
Among the OIC member countries with available data, Oman has the highest ratio of government expenditures on education as percentage of total government expenditures (31.1%). It was followed by United Arab Emirates (27.2%), Morocco (25.7%), and Kyrgyzstan (25.6%), all dedicating over one fourth of the total government expenditures to the education sector. Together with these countries, Cote d’Ivoire (24.6%), Djibouti (22.8%), Tunisia (22.4%), Burkina Faso (21.8%), Mozambique (21.0%), and Algeria (20.3%) were also among the top 10 countries (Figure 30). 
Figure 30: Top 10 OIC Countries by Government Expenditures on Education as Percentage of Total Government Expenditures (%)* 
Oman 
UAE 
Morocco 
Kyrgyzstan 
Côte d'Ivoire 
Djibouti 
Tunisia 
Burkina Faso 
Mozambiq... 
Algeria 
Percent 
31.1 
22.8 
20.321.021.822.4 
20.321.021.822.4 
20.321.021.822.4 
25.727.2 
24.625.6 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO * Data for the latest year available between 2006 and 2008. 
EAP ECA LAC MENA SA SSA EAP ECA LAC MENA SA SSA 
All Countries OIC Countries 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 
26 
4.3 Government Expenditures on Education per Pupil 
In addition to the abovementioned macro-level indicators that compares government expenditures on education with GDP or total government expenditures, governments’ financial contribution to education sector can also be explained at micro-level by measuring how much is spent by the government per student. Unlike the former ones, this approach focuses directly on the level of government spending on education regardless of the size of the economy or the total expenditures of the government. 
Government expenditures on education per pupil increased all over the world between 1999 and 2008 (Figure 31). In this period, the world average increased from $1485 to $2264, corresponding to an annual average growth rate of 4.8 percent. The average for developed countries, with an annual average increase of 5.1%, increased from $5856 to $9139. The average for developing countries increased from $274 to $478, corresponding to an annual average growth rate of 6.4 percent. Consequently, as of 2008, governments’ spending per pupil in developed countries was over 19 times that in developing countries. As for OIC countries, the average spending per pupil increased from $265 to $461. Thus, although it increased almost the same rate as that for developing countries (6.3%), it was still lower than the level recorded in developing countries. 
Figure 31: Government Expenditures on Education per Pupil* (US $) 
1999 2008 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO * The averages are weighted averages for countries with available data. 
Figure 32 shows the regional averages of government expenditures on education per pupil for OIC countries in comparison with all countries for the years 1999 and 2008. The average spending per pupil increased between those years in all the regions not only for OIC countries but also for other countries. The highest increase for OIC countries was recorded in ECA (171%) and MENA (151%), followed by LA (55%), SA (27%), SSA (13%), and EAP (12%). Consequently, as of 2008, the highest government expenditure on education per pupil reached $1172 in ECA, $934 in MENA, $400 in EAP, $229 in LA, $104 in SSA, and $68 in SA. However, these regional averages 
US $ 
10,000 
9,000 
9,139 
8,000 
7,000 
6,000 
5,000 
4,000 
3,000 
2,000 
1,000 
478 461 
0 
World Developed Developing OIC 
1,485 
2,264 
5,856 
274 265 
27 
for OIC countries continued to be lower than the overall regional averages and the highest differences were observed in ECA and EAP. 
Figure 32: Regional Averages for Government Expenditures on Education per Pupil* 
US $ 1999 2008 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO * The averages are weighted averages for countries with available data. 
2 87,7000 
Among the OIC countries with available data, Kuwait has the highest government expenditure on education per pupil ($6513), followed by United Arab Emirates ($2474), Oman ($1711), Turkey ($1311), and Malaysia ($1219). Iran, Tunisia, Maldives, Morocco, and Indonesia, spending around $300 to $850 per pupil, are also among the top 10 countries (Figure 33). 
Figure 33: Top 10 OIC Countries by Government Expenditures on Education per Pupil* (US $) 
Kuwait 
UAE 
Oman 
Turkey 
Malaysia 
Iran 
Tunisia 
Maldives 
Morocco 
Indonesia 
US $ 
6,513 
776842 
292544765 
292544765 
292544765 
1,3111,711 
1,219 
2,474 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO * Data for the latest year available between 2003 and 2008. 
8000 
66000 
5000 
4000 
3000 
8 4 
2 2000 
987111,,,4 111390 1000 
9 04 5 4 
2410028 11160 
1,479 
1,830 
1,830 
3,674 
573 561 
92 93 357 432 
92 93 357 432 
92 93 357 432 
148 373 
148 373 
148 373 
148 373 
54 92 
EAP ECA LAC MENA SA SSA EAP ECA LAC MENA SA SSA 
All Countries OIC Countries 
0 1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000 6,000 7,000 8,000 
28 
4.4 Government Expenditures on Education per Pupil as Percentage of GDP Per Capita 
Analyzing the government expenditures on education per pupil in nominal terms may be misleading when comparing countries of widely different levels of income. The differences in purchasing power parities among countries are also problematic to such an analysis. To eliminate such problems to some extent and ensure more comparable data among countries, the nominal value of government expenditures on education per pupil is expressed as a percentage of GDP per capita, whereby it becomes more reasonable to make comparison between countries as governments’ spending are measured with respect to the income level of countries. 
World average government expenditures on education per pupil as percentage GDP per capita increased from 20.5% in 1999 to 21.2% in 2008. The increase in this ratio in developing countries as well as OIC countries was quite limited as compared to developed countries. The ratio for developed countries increased from 21.8% to 23.5% in this period while the ratio for developing countries increased from 18.1% to only 18.2% and remained well below that for developed countries. The ratio for OIC countries was not better than that for developing countries. It increased from 16.3% in 1999 to only 16.5% in 2008, remaining below the average for developing countries (Figure 34). 
Figure 34: Government Expenditures on Education per Pupil as Percentage of GDP per Capita* 
23.5 25 
t 1999 2008 
necre21.8 P2020.5 21.2 
18.1 
18.2 1516.3 
16.5 
1050World Developed Developing OIC 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO * The averages are weighted averages for countries with available data. 
Figure 35 reflects the regional averages of government expenditures on education per pupil as percentage of GDP per capita for OIC countries in comparison with all countries for the years 1999 and 2008. The ratio for OIC countries in EAP declined from 16.8% in 1999 to 16.2% in 2008 while the average for all the countries in the region increased from 16.1% to 16.6% in this period. 
29 
130 
t n1999 2008 
ecreP251 
.820151050EAP ECA LAC MENA SA SSA EAP ECA LAC MENA SA SSA 
All Countries OIC Countries 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO * The averages are weighted averages for countries with available data. 
For OIC countries in ECA, the ratio increased from 11.9% to 12.7% in this period, yet it still remained well below the overall regional average, which increased from 23.4% to 24.2% in the same period. The ratio for members in LA from 14.3% to 16.3%, though the regional average increased from 14.3% to 17.3%. The ratio for the members in MENA also increased, yet at a higher rate as compared to other regions. It increased from 14.1% to 17.5%, though it still remained below the regional averages of 16.3% in 1999 and 18.9% in 2008. The ratio for member countries in SA stayed at 13.6% but the overall regional average declined significantly in this period, from 21.0% to 14. %. The ratio for members in SSA decreased from 19.7% to 18.1% and continued to be lower than the regional average, which also decreased from 21.6% to 20.6%. 
Time wise analysis indicates that OIC countries in ECA, LA and MENA witnessed an increase in their ratio of government expenditures on education per pupil as percentage of GDP per capita between 1999 and 2008 and the increase was more remarkable for members in MENA. Members in EAP and SSA experienced a decline in this ratio while those in SA reported no change in the period under consideration. Consequently, as of 2008, the highest ratio was recorded for members in SSA (18.1%), followed by members in MENA (17.5%), LA (16.3%), EAP (16.2%), SA (13.6%), and ECA (12.7%). Considering the comparison between the regional averages for OIC countries and the overall averages for their respective regions, the averages for member countries were weaker in all the regions as of 2008 (Figure 35). 
Burkina Faso reported a ratio of government expenditures on education per pupil as percentage of GDP per capita of 34.1 percent, which was the highest ratio among the OIC countries with available data (Figure 36). In Niger, government expenditures on education per pupil also accounted for about one third of GDP per capita (33.2%). 
Figure 35: Regional Averages for Government Expenditures on Education per Pupil as Percentage of GDP per Capita* 
16.1 
19.7 
16.6 
23.4 
14.3 16.3 
24.2 
17.3 18.9 
14.1 
30 
20.6 
16.2 
12.7 
21.0 21.6 
16.8 
11.9 14.3 
14.1 
13.6 
16.3 17.5 
13.6 
In Morocco (27.9%), Tunisia (26.4%), and Senegal (25.2%), these expenditures accounted for over one fourth of GDP per capita. Maldives, Mozambique, Benin Mali, and Kuwait followed these countries and were placed among the top 10 OIC countries by government expenditures on education per pupil as percentage of GDP per capita. 
Figure 36: Top 10 OIC Countries by Government Expenditures on Education per Pupil as Percentage of GDP per Capita* (Percent) 
Burkina Faso 
Niger 
Morocco 
Tunisia 
Senegal 
Maldives 
Mozambique 
Benin 
Mali 
Kuwait 
Percent 
33.234.1 
19.4 
17.819.1 
17.819.1 
17.819.1 
25.226.427.9 
23.324.8 
Source: SESRIC, UNESCO * Data for the latest year available between 2004 and 2008. 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 
31 
5 Research and Scientific Development R 
esearch knowledge-based, understanding in science on or different and an technology innovation-driven aspects is of of life great while, economy. importance on the On other and one key hand, hand, to it progress it helps promotes to towards improve better a 
the standard of living by creating new knowledge and technological innovation. 
Today, there is severe competition among countries to become the most competitive and knowledge-based economy in the world. In this respect, gaining a competitive advantage against other countries, which is of particular importance to the OIC member countries in catching-up within this competitive world of knowledge economy, depends mostly on how well they perform in research activities. This section of the report presents an overview of achievements by the OIC member countries in the field of research and development (R&D) and science & technology (S&T). 
5.1 Human Resources in Research and Development 
The availability of abundant and highly qualified researchers is an essential condition to foster innovation and promote the scientific and technological development of a country. However, figures indicate that OIC member countries, on average, fell well behind the world average in terms of researchers per million people: 649 vs. 2,532, respectively9. The gap is much higher when compared to the EU that has an average of 6,494 researchers per million people and some other developed countries like New Zealand, Japan, and Republic of Korea (Figure 37). 
Figure 37: Researchers per Million People* 
Source: UNESCO. * Headcount data for the most recent year available. 
9 Figures are the weighted averages of countries for which data are available. 
32 
0 2,000 4,000 6,000 8,000 10,000 12,000 
Figure 37 illustrates the OIC map of distribution of researchers employed in R&D and reveals the following observations: 
Only 7 of the 29 member countries with available data have more than one thousand researchers per million people, two of which –Jordan and Tunisia– are above the world average. 
7 member countries had less than one hundred researchers per million people, most of which are in Sub-Saharan Africa. 
Great disparity exists among the member countries; Jordan has 8,060 researchers per million inhabitants while Niger has merely 53. 
5.2 Women in Research Activities 
In the last decades, women, with better access to training and education facilities thanks to the rising awareness on gender in/equality, have become more qualified and motivated to participate in the labour force. Nevertheless, the progress achieved so far in the field of R&D seems to be unsatisfactory neither globally nor at the OIC level. Women, in the OIC, represent around 26.8% of the total researchers, slightly lower than the world average of 29.5%10. The gap is higher when compared to the EU and some other developed countries like New Zealand and Norway but still the OIC average is higher than some others like Republic of Korea and Japan (Figure 38). 
Figure 38: Women as a Share of Total Researchers (%)* 
S60 
0 
.9 .064350; ; naad0 
d.nu0 
2.a28g4 40.2; U; 4osn2a; oF8 
ab.i6 a ar.7neG51i30g; 1kira; lNuea8 
Bn.gie1un18 G20.; eil4Sa; aMibm10aG0Europe & Central 
Asia 
Middle East & 
East Asia & 
South North Africa Pacific 
Asia Sub-SaharanAfrica Source: UNESCO * Headcount data for the most recent year available. 
10 Aggregate calculations are based on countries with available headcount data –for the most recent year available. 
EU; 34.4 
World; 29.5 
OIC; 26.8 
New Zealand; 43.3 
Norway; 37.0 
Rep. of Korea; 20.5 
Japan; 18.2 
33 
Kazakhstan; 53.1 
Azerbaijan; 51.1 
Kyrgyz Rep.; 47.2 
Turkey; 33.9 
Tunisia; 42.8 
Algeria; 33.9 
Kuwait; 33.4 
Morocco; 26.2 
Iran; 23.9 
Saudi Arabia; 19.5 
Jordan; 17.9 
Malaysia; 37.1 
Indonesia; 29.2 
Pakistan; 14.6 
Bangladesh; 8.2 
With respect to the data demonstrated in Figure 38, the following observations can be drawn: 
➢ The share of women in total researchers is above the world average in 10 of the 24 OIC 
member countries with available data. 7 of them outperform the EU average as well. 
➢ According to regional averages, OIC members in Europe & Central Asia and East Asia & 
Pacific report higher rates of women researchers, often above the world average. 
➢ Members in the Middle East, on average, report lower rates of women researchers than 
those in North Africa. The share of women researchers range from 42.8% in Tunisia to 
17.9% in Jordan. 
➢ Intra-regional difference is even higher in Sub-Saharan Africa: on one hand, there are 
countries like Sudan and Uganda where women represent more than 35% of researchers 
while, on the other hand, there also are countries where women’s share is less than 10% as 
in the case of Gambia. 
➢ Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan are the only member countries to have more women 
researchers than men. Kyrgyzstan, Tunisia, and Sudan –all with over 40% women 
researchers– are also close to achieving gender parity. 
5.3 Expenditure on Research & Development 
5.3.1 R&D Intensity 
Today, around 80% of the global 
Figure 39: GERD, % of World Total (2007) R&D expenditures is spent by developed countries, of which 33.5% by the USA, 23.5% by the EU, and 13.4% by Japan (Figure 39). The OIC countries accounted for only 1.8% of the world total Gross Domestic Expenditures on R&D (GERD), or 9.5% of the total GERD of developing countries. Nevertheless, what is more important than the volume of GERD is its weight in the total expenditures or, in other words, in GDP. Accordingly, R&D intensity (GERD as a percentage of GDP) is a widely used indicator of S&T activities. It reflects the innovative capacity of a country in 
Other Developed 10.1% 
USA 33.5% 
EU Japan 23.5% 13.4% 
OIC 1.8% 
Source: UNESCO Other Developing 17.6% 
34 
that a higher R&D intensity indicates that relatively more resources are devoted to the development of new products or production processes. 
In this connection, the OIC Ten-Year Programme of Action to Meet the Challenges Facing the Muslim Ummah in the 21st Century, which was adopted at the Third Extraordinary Session of the Islamic Summit Conference held in Makkah al Mukarramah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, in December 2005, calls upon Islamic countries to encourage research and development programmes, taking into account that the global percentage of this activity is 2% of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP), and request Member States to ensure that their individual contribution is not inferior to half of this percentage (OIC-TYPOA, 1995, Part 2, Section V, Article 4). Nevertheless, available data show that OIC member countries’ spending on R&D activities was significantly lower than the world average and still far away from the implied target of 1% of GDP by 2015 (Figure 40). 
Figure 40: R&D Intensity (%)* 
3.5 
4 
3 
42..33; ; anaerpoaJ3.0 
Kf o. pe2 2.5 
R2.1; dn2.0 
al2 
a09 .e41Z8 
.3 
EU; 1.76 
3 4 ; 60667w .a..; i.1.5 
5 
e000s1 e1 0i28 
e000s1 e1 0i28 
; ; N; 5 .8 ; 1u26 
; ; N; 5 .8 ; 1u26 
no6.n.ay001.qi33 
no6.n.ay001.qi33 
ucai..00.se; 5 tT06 39 
c.b00y; k0.s; ; 09 02i3 
o; p; ra.0 
o; p; ra.0 
.; 0.on8 1.0 
.; 0.on8 1.0 
nrml0k4 
nrml0k4 
nrml0k4 
OIC; 0.41 
OIC; 0.41 
OIC; 0.41 
OIC; 0.41 
OIC; 0.41 
OIC; 0.41 
2aensua; 0.ia100a.0aaao0ta.Ta.R; rzdn; 0bj.0; PsIiF0a0Maz o; aMnni0; nhla; rya ; tadas; akatbMagritgpni Adeiagrirsaoyri ezuinU0.5 
keyJegaedkSrnzwoniKEgjKuuuudlAearaBKnSATISB0.0 
Source: UNESCO * Data for the most recent year available between 2003 and 2007. 
Regarding the R&D intensity in the OIC member countries, the situation can be summarized as below: ➢ Among the member countries with available data, Tunisia, the only country to have met 
the target so far, reported the highest level of R&D intensity (1.02%), followed by Turkey 
(0.74%) and Pakistan (0.68%), while the lowest spending level was recorded for Brunei 
(0.04%). 
➢ Most of the member countries spent less than 0.5% of GDP on R&D. 
➢ R&D intensity for the OIC member countries averages 0.41%, which was quite lower than 
the EU average of 1.76% and the world average of 1.78% as well as the targeted rate of 1%. 
World; 1.78 
35 
GERD as % of GDP, 2007 
or latest available year 
GERD as % of GDP, 1998 or earliest available year 
Source: GERD Data: UNESCO; GDP data; IMF, World Economic Outlook Database, October 2009. 
Figure 41 illustrates the change in R&D intensity between 1998 and 2007 for the OIC member countries for which data were available. Accordingly; 
➢ In most of the member countries, R&D intensity remained relatively stable. ➢ Tunisia, Turkey, Pakistan, Morocco, and Malaysia managed to significantly increase their R&D intensity. It was more than doubled in Tunisia and Morocco while the increase in Pakistan was over 6-fold. Accordingly, although Iran, Sudan, and Mozambique had the highest R&D intensity rates in 1998, Tunisia and Turkey outperformed them while Pakistan caught up with Iran by 2007. ➢ Algeria, Azerbaijan, Sudan, and Kuwait reported a significant decrease in their R&D 
intensity. ➢ The average for the OIC increased by only 0.14 percentage point in that decade. Although it is higher than that for the EU members (0.09 percentage point), which already have high R&D intensity, it is still lower than that for the world (0.16) which implies that OIC countries cannot reach the world average R&D intensity with such a low rate of improvement in their R&D expenditures. 
➢ Among the few Sub-Saharan members that can provide data, Mozambique, with 0.49% 
R&D intensity, was the only country to spend above the OIC average. 
➢ Considering the figures in some other developed countries like Japan (3.44%) and Republic 
of Korea (3.23%), both of which owe their economic development largely to investments 
in advanced technology, OIC member countries needed to allocate much more resources 
to R&D activities to bridge the gap with developed countries. 
Figure 41: Trends in R&D Intensity 
1.2 
Tunisia 1.0 
0.8 
Pakistan 
Turkey Morocco 
Malaysia Iran 0.6 
Mozambique 
0.4 
Jordan 
Uganda 
Sudan 
Kazakhstan 
0.0 
Saudi Arabia 
Tajikistan 
Kuwait 
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 
Kyrgyz Rep. 
0.2 
Indonesia 
Egypt Burkina Faso 
Azerbaijan Brunei Senegal 
36 
OIC 
Algeria 
5.3.2 R&D Expenditures per Capita 
―R&D expenditures per capita‖ is also a frequently used indicator to make comparisons among countries with respect to the level of spending on R&D. Accordingly, the following observations can be drawn for OIC countries from Figure 42 that presents data for the change in the indicator in the last decade with available data. 
➢ Of the OIC countries with available data, Turkey had the highest R&D expenditures per 
capita ($95.2), followed by Malaysia ($79.0), Iran ($66.7) and Tunisia ($65.9). ➢ The lowest rates were recorded for Tajikistan, Burkina Faso, Senegal, and Indonesia, all 
with less than $2 of R&D expenditures per capita. ➢ The average for all OIC countries with available data was calculated as $23.3, which was well below the world average of $194 and the EU average of $524. In Japan, this figure reached up to $1155, higher than GDP per capita values of 10 OIC countries. ➢ In a decade, from 1998 to 2007, R&D expenditures per capita increased by an average of only $13 for OIC countries, compared to $81 for the world and $193 for the EU, which could be considered as another source and indicator of divergence between OIC countries and the rest of the world with respect to scientific development. ➢ In the same period, Turkey, Tunisia, and Malaysia were the top three countries to have 
most increased their GERD per capita; $61.5, $47.4, and $46.9, respectively. ➢ On the other hand, 7 of the 23 OIC countries with available data reported decline in their GERD per capita. Kuwait, which once had the highest value of $73.8, experienced the sharpest decline in this period so that its GERD per capita fell down to $37.2. 
Figure 42: R&D Expenditures per Capita (PPP $) 
Rep. of Korea 
79.0 
24.9 
23.3 
23.3 
22.8 
22.8 
22.8 
17.6 
17.4 
17.4 
13.4 
13.4 
12.6 
11.5 
11.5 
11.2 
11.2 
11.2 
1.6 1.4 1.3 1.2 0102030405060708090 
1.6 1.4 1.3 1.2 0102030405060708090 
1.6 1.4 1.3 1.2 0102030405060708090 
1.6 1.4 1.3 1.2 0102030405060708090 
1.6 1.4 1.3 1.2 0102030405060708090 
1.6 1.4 1.3 1.2 0102030405060708090 
1.6 1.4 1.3 1.2 0102030405060708090 
1.6 1.4 1.3 1.2 0102030405060708090 
1.6 1.4 1.3 1.2 0102030405060708090 
1.6 1.4 1.3 1.2 0102030405060708090 
18.5 
18.5 
18.5 
18.5 
1200 1000 800 600 400 200 
World EU Japan New 
World EU Japan New 
World EU Japan New 
Zealand 
Zealand 
Zealand 
Zealand 
Zealand 
Zealand 
0 
7.3 10.4 
7.3 10.4 
7.3 10.4 
7.3 10.4 
1.7 7.7 7.0 11.8 
1.7 7.7 7.0 11.8 
1.7 7.7 7.0 11.8 
1.7 7.7 7.0 11.8 
11.9 
11.9 
11.9 
11.9 
721 
12.8 
12.8 
12.8 
12.8 
12.8 
5.1 5.0 4.8 3.9 
2.8 
1.6 1.4 1.3 1.2 0102030405060708090 
1.6 1.4 1.3 1.2 0102030405060708090 
33.7 
32.1 39.3 
18.5 
1998 or ealiest year available 
2007 or latest year available 
1200 1000 800 600 400 200 
1200 1000 800 600 400 200 
1200 1000 800 600 400 200 
World EU Japan New 
Zealand 
Zealand 
0 
0 
680 
680 
680 
73.8 
73.8 
7.3 10.4 
9.0 
9.0 
7.3 
7.3 
7.3 
7.3 
1.7 7.7 7.0 11.8 
1.7 7.7 7.0 11.8 
11.9 
11.9 
11.9 
6.5 
6.5 
6.5 
6.5 
6.5 
2.5 
2.5 
2.5 
2.5 
721 
721 
721 
201 320 194 
201 320 194 
201 320 194 
113 331 
113 331 
113 331 
524 
524 
524 
1,155 
327 
327 
327 
327 
12.8 
12.8 
12.8 
12.8 
2.9 2.8 
2.9 2.8 
2.9 2.8 
2.9 2.8 
2.9 2.8 
2.9 2.8 
1.6 1.4 1.3 0.9 
1.6 1.4 1.3 0.9 
1.6 1.4 1.3 0.9 
1.6 1.4 1.3 0.9 
1.6 1.4 1.3 0.9 
Source: GERD Data: UNESCO; Population data: IMF, World Economic Outlook Database, October 2009. 
100 
95.2 
66.7 
65.9 
37.2 
1.6 1.4 1.3 1.2 0102030405060708090 
1.6 1.4 1.3 1.2 0102030405060708090 
33.7 
32.1 39.3 
1998 or ealiest year available 
1998 or ealiest year available 
37 
1200 1000 800 600 400 200 
1200 1000 800 600 400 200 
1200 1000 800 600 400 200 
680 
524 
524 
1,155 
5.3.3 R&D Expenditures by Sector 
Given that GERD is the sum of R&D expenditures of the performing sectors, it is useful to disaggregate it into individual sectors to see how much R&D each sector performs. This sectoral disaggregation is based on the United Nations classification that defines four major sectors of performance: Government, Business Enterprise, Higher Education, and Private Non-Profit. In this respect, Figure 43 presents the distribution of GERD among these sectors in the OIC member countries for which data are available. The figures are based on total available resources, regardless of their source of funds. Considering the data illustrated in Figure 43, sectoral distribution of GERD can be summed up as below: 
➢ In most of the OIC member countries (10 out of 17 with available data), more than 50% of GERD was spent by government sector. This share reached up to 100% in Kuwait and over 90% in Indonesia, Tajikistan, and Brunei Darussalam. ➢ Despite having a share of less than 50%, government sector in Tunisia and Sudan is the 
dominant sector, spending more on R&D than the other sectors do. ➢ The share of Business Enterprise in GERD is highest in Malaysia with 84.9%. Moreover, in Kazakhstan, Turkey, and Sudan, Business Enterprise is responsible for more than one third of the GERD. ➢ GERD of Business Enterprise is not available or at negligible levels in Kuwait, Tajikistan, 
Brunei Darussalam, Pakistan, Burkina Faso and Senegal. ➢ Higher Education is the leading sector in Senegal, Morocco, and Turkey, accounting respectively for 66.7%, 52.4%, and 48.2% of the total GERD. Furthermore, more than one quarter of the GERD in Pakistan, Iran, Tunisia, and Sudan is also performed by this sector. ➢ The share of R&D expenditures by the Private Non-Profit sector is at a negligible level in 
all of the member countries except Uganda (25.0%) and Burkina Faso (21.1%). 
Figure 43: Distribution of GERD by Sector of Performance (%)* 
100 
0102030405060708090 
Government 
Source: UNESCO * Data for the most recent year available. 
38 
Private non-profit 
Higher education 
Business enterprise 
Not specified 
5.3.4 R&D Expenditures by Source of Funds 
Figure 44 presents information on the funding sources of R&D in OIC member countries. Source distribution of the GERD has been made again on a sectoral basis as specified above, yet including additionally the funds from abroad. 
Figure 44: Distribution of GERD by Source of Funds (%)* 
Government 
Source: UNESCO * Data for the most recent year available. 
0102030405060708090 
Not specified 
Abroad 
Private non-profit 
Higher education 
Business enterprise 
Accordingly, given the data illustrated in Figure 44, the situation in OIC member countries can be summarized by the following observations: 
➢ In most of the OIC member countries, R&D is mainly financed by the government sector. Out of the 17 member countries for which data are available, 11 countries are receiving more than %50 of R&D funds from the government. ➢ GERD in Senegal is completely funded by government sector and, in Kuwait, Tajikistan, 
and Brunei Darussalam, the share of government funding is over 90%. ➢ Despite having a share of less than 50%, government sector in Tunisia is the dominant sector, providing more R&D funds than the other sectors. Government’s role in Turkey is also at a significant level since it provides almost half of the funds (47.1%), slightly lower than those provided by business sector. ➢ In Malaysia, government’s share in R&D funding is as low as 5%, which is the lowest rate 
among all OIC countries with available data. ➢ Business Enterprise in Malaysia accounts for 84.7% of the total R&D funds. In Turkey and Kazakhstan, the business sector is also dominant, providing respectively 48.4% and 44.5% of the total R&D funds. ➢ Higher Education sector in Tunisia provides 30.5% of the total R&D funds, which is the highest rate among all OIC countries with available data. Additionally, sector’s share exceeds 10% in Kazakhstan, Pakistan, and Iran. 
100 
39 
➢ Mozambique and Uganda deserve special attention as their R&D funds mostly come from 
abroad, 65.3% and 50.7% respectively. 
5.4 High Technology Exports 
High-technology exports (HTE) are products with high R&D intensity, including aerospace, computers, software and related services, consumer electronics, semiconductors, pharmaceuticals, scientific instruments and electrical machinery, which mostly depend on an advanced technological infrastructure and inward FDI in high-tech industries. World high-technology exports were estimated to have reached over $1.7 trillion in 2007. Around 70% of that amount originated from developed countries, of which 33.3% from the EU members, 13.1% from the United States, 7.0% from Japan, and 6.3% from Republic of Korea (Figure 45). 
Figure 45: High Technology Exports, % of World Total (2007) 
Other Developed 10.5% 
Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators (WDI), Online Database. 
China was the largest exporter of HTE, accounting for almost one-fifth of the world total HTE and two-thirds of the total HTE of developing countries. Confirming the lack of adequate infrastructure and FDI in most of OIC countries, it is observed that all the member countries for which data are available accounted for only 4.3% of the world HTE (Figure 9), or 14.4% of the total HTE of developing countries. 
➢ Data for OIC countries are illustrated in Figure 46, which yield the following observations: ➢ Malaysia and Indonesia were, by far, the top ranking OIC member countries by high 
technology exports, together representing 93.5% of the total HTE of the OIC. ➢ With $64.6 billion, Malaysia, on its own, accounted for 86.5% of the total HTE of the OIC. It was also the 9th largest exporter of high-technology products in the world, accounting for 3.7% of the world HTE. ➢ Kazakhstan, with around $1.5 billion of HTE, accounted for 2% of the total HTE of the OIC countries, rendering it the 3rd largest exporter of high-technology products in the OIC. 
Rep. Other 
of Korea 6.3% Japan 7.0%Developing 
6.2% 
USA 13.1% China 19.3% 
EU 33.3% 
OIC 4.3% 
40 
Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators (WDI), Online Database. * Data for 2007 or latest available year. 
For a better understanding of the importance of HTE to a country, it is useful to look at the share of these exports in its total manufactured exports. Figure 47 presents these shares for 48 member countries for which data are available in a comparative manner to reflect any change over time. 
Figure 47: High Technology Exports: 2000 vs. 2007 (% of Manufactured Exports) 
Oman 60 
55504540Gabon 35Cote d'Ivoire 3025Kazakhstan 
2015105Brunei 
Nigeria Albania Cameroon Iran Lebanon Burkina Gambia Uganda Faso Tunisia Jordan Turkmenistan Azerbaijan Senegal Algeria Niger Morocco Mali Suriname Mozambique Indonesia Kyrgyz Rep. 00 Guyana 2 Sudan 
4 Turkey 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 2 
➢ HTE of the other leading member countries ranged from $100 million to $1 billion. ➢ In Sub-Saharan Africa, Benin, Guinea, and Sudan recorded even less than $30 thousand of 
HTE. ➢ Cote d’Ivoire, with more than $450 million of HTE, went far ahead of the other Sub- Saharan members. It also ranked as the 6th largest exporter of high-technology products in the OIC. 
Figure 46: High Technology Exports (Million US$)* 
Malaysia 
6 58 60 
Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators (WDI), Online Database. 
Pakistan, Yemen, Kuwait, Syria, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Bangladesh, Comoros, Egypt, Iraq, Benin, Bahrain, Togo, Qatar, Guinea, Maldives (Ranked by decending order of 2007 values) 
41 
2007 or latest yearavailable 
2000 or earliest year available 
With respect to the data illustrated in Figure 47, the evolution of high technology exports in the OIC member countries during the period 2000-2007 can be summarized as below: 
➢ Largest improvements across the OIC were recorded by two Sub-Saharan members, namely Gabon and Cote d’Ivoire, having managed to increase the share of HTE from below 7% to over 30% of their manufactured exports. ➢ Kazakhstan also reported relatively high expansion rate in the share of HTE, from 3.9% to 
23.2%. ➢ In 16 member countries listed at the bottom of the Figure, HTE continue to account for less than 2% of their manufactured exports. Nevertheless, there were improvements in 9 of them though to a limited extent. ➢ Decline in the share of HTE in manufactured exports has also been observed in many countries, particularly in Kyrgyz Republic with 15 percentage points. Overall, there were 22 OIC countries having reported a decline in the share of HTE in their manufactured exports. ➢ Representing over 90% of the total HTE of the OIC, Malaysia and Indonesia have also witnessed a decrease in the share of HTE in their manufactured exports, 7.9 and 4.9 percentage points, respectively. Yet again, Malaysia continues to have the largest share of HTE in manufactured exports (51.7%). ➢ Although the average for OIC countries declined by 10 percentage points to 20.2%, it was still higher than the world average of 18.9%. Nevertheless, when Malaysia, which accounted for about 87% of the total HTE of the OIC, is excluded, the average for OIC countries falls down to 4.1%. 
5.5 Scientific Publications 
Academic research is an important component of all research activities conducted in a country. To a certain extent, the performance in academic research can be well reflected by the number of scientific articles published in indexed journals. In this regard, the quantity and the growth of the research output, i.e. articles, are common indicators used to measure the research performance of a given institution or country. Indeed, such bibliometric indicators have been widely used in national science and technology statistics publications to measure scientific capacity and linkages to world science11 and particularly in national and international rankings of universities12. 
11 UNESCO Institute for Statistics, “What do bibliometric indicators tell us about world scientific output?”, UIS Bulletin on Science and Technology Statistics, Issue 2, September 2005. 12 For example, Academic Ranking of World Universities by Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SJTU), World University Rankings by the Times Higher Education Supplement (THES), and also the OIC University Ranking make use of the research output as an important indicator in their ranking methodologies. 
42 
5.5.1 Published Articles 
Compared to 18,391 articles they published in the year 2000, OIC member countries as a whole published 63,342 articles13 in 2009 in journals that were covered by Science Citation Index Expanded (SCI-EXPANDED), Social Science Citation Index (SSCI), and Arts & Humanities Citation Index (A&HCI)14. Although it is an over three-fold increase in a decade, the amount reached is still below those of some individual countries in the world, such as the United States, China, Germany, Japan, and England (Figure 48). 
Figure 48: The Number of Published Articles, 2009 
73 
66 64 63 
46 
33 
24 020406080 
Thousands >100 >100 
Source: ISI Web of Knowledge [24.03.2010]. 
Figure 49 and 50 present information on the contribution of each OIC member country to this output. In this respect, the following observations outline the performance of the OIC member countries in publishing articles: 
➢ Production of scientific publications –here articles– in the OIC is heavily concentrated in a 
few of the member countries. ➢ More than half of the articles (52.7%) originate from only two member countries, namely Turkey (31.6%) and Iran (21.1%). Adding Egypt (7.0%), Malaysia (6.2%), and Pakistan (5.3%), these five countries account for 71.2% of all published articles (see Figure 49). ➢ Some other member countries in the Middle East & North Africa, South Asia, and East Asia & Pacific also perform well while those in Latin America, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Central Asia are generally lagging behind. ➢ Individually, there are 10 countries that published less than 20 articles in 2009. These countries are not concentrated in one region but dispersed across regions: for example; from Guyana in Latin America to Somalia in Sub-Saharan Africa, and from Turkmenistan in Central Asia to Maldives in South Asia. 
13 The total reflects the sum of individual OIC countries and it is not refined for internationally co-authored papers. 14 Data are collected from the ISI Web of Knowledge maintained by Thomson Reuters. For further information, see http://isiwebofknowledge.com/ 
43 
➢ The number of countries having published 
Figure 49: Top 10 OIC Countries by the less than 100 articles reaches 24. 
Number of Published Articles (2009) 
➢ Nigeria stands out as the only Sub-Saharan member to have produced over one thousand articles (1,922), the closest ones in the region being Uganda and Cameroon, each with over 450 articles. 
As seen in Figure 50, some other member countries in the Middle East & North Africa, South Asia, and East Asia & Pacific also perform well while those in Latin America, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Central Asia were generally lagging behind. The number of countries having published less than 100 articles reached 24 while there were 10 countries that published less than 20 articles in 2009. The member countries publishing less than 20 articles were not concentrated in one region but dispersed across regions: for example; from Guyana in Latin America to Somalia in Sub-Saharan Africa, and from Turkmenistan in Central Asia to Maldives in South Asia. 
Figure 50: Articles Published in International Journals, 2009* 
Source: ISI Web of Knowledge [24.03.2010]. * Total number of articles published in journals covered by Science Citation Index Expanded (SCI- EXPANDED), Social Science Citation Index (SSCI), and Arts & Humanities Citation Index (A&HCI). 
44 
Turkey 20.0 (31.6%) 
Iran 13.4 (21.1%) 
Egypt 4.4 (7.0%) 
Malaysia 3.9 (6.2%) 
Pakistan 3.3 (5.3%) 
Tunisia 2.2 (3.5%) 
Saudi Arabia 2.0 (3.2%) 
Nigeria 1.9 (3.0%) 
Algeria 1.4 (2.2%) 
Morocco 1.1 (1.8%) 
0 10 20 30 
Thousands Source: ISI Web of Knowledge 
5.5.2 The Evolution of Publication Outcome 
The growth in the number of articles on a per-capita basis reflects a better indicator of productivity in scientific publications as it takes into account the relative size of the population in the countries compared. In this respect, Figure 51 presents data on articles per million people (pmp) in OIC member countries in a manner to reflect the evolution in the last decade of 2000- 2009. Accordingly: 
➢ On average, OIC member 
countries produced only 15 
articles (pmp) in 2000 while this 
number increased to 42 in 2009, 
which still could be considered 
low given that this number 
reached up to 1355 in Canada, 
1241 in England, 894 in Germany, 
682 in Republic of Korea, 516 in 
Japan, and 172 in Russia. 
➢ 49 out of the 57 member 
countries recorded an increase in 
that decade, but this increase in 29 
of them was no more than 10 
articles. This, in general, implies 
that the expansion recorded in 
countries with low number of 
articles (pmp) remained quite 
limited compared to those with high 
numbers. 
➢ Turkey, in absolute terms, took the lead in boosting scientific productivity with an 
increase of 205 articles (pmp), followed by Iran (161), Tunisia (160), Malaysia (108), and 
Qatar (103). 
Figure 51: Articles per Million People: 2000 vs. 2009* 
300 
250 
200 
150 
Malaysia Oman Brunei 100 
50 Algeria Morocco 
00 50 100 150 200 250 
25 
201510Djibouti 
5Source: Articles data: ISI Web of Knowledge [24.03.2010]; Population data: IMF, World Economic Outlook Database, October 2009. *OIC Regional Averages: ECA: Europe & Central Asia NA: North Africa EAP: East Asia & Pacific SA: South Asia LA: Latin America SSA: Sub-Saharan Africa ME: Middle East 
Iraq Mali Mauritania 
Côte Suriname d'Ivoire Togo 
00 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 
6 
Sudan Tajikistan 5Mozambique 
Bangladesh 
Niger 
4Yemen 
Sierra Leone Indonesia 32GuineaChad Comoros Afghanistan 1Somalia Turkmenistan 00 1 2 3 4 
45 
Gabon Gambia OIC 
Turkey 
Tunisia 
Iran Kuwait Qatar UA Emirates Jordan Lebanon 
Bahrain 
LibyaAlbania Maldives Kazakhstan Burkina Faso Uganda Nigeria Guyana 
Azerbaijan 
Saudi Arabia Egypt 
Cameroon Palestine Pakistan Benin Senegal 
Articles per million people, 2009 
Articles per million people, 2000 
Guinea-Bissau Kyrgyz Rep. Syria 
Articles per million people, 2009 
Articles per million people, 2000 
Articles per million people, 2009 
Articles per million people, 2000 
Uzbekistan 
➢ Four other countries, namely Bahrain, Lebanon, United Arab Emirates, and Jordan, 
recorded an increase of over 50 articles (pmp). 
➢ 8 out of the 57 members, namely Kuwait, Suriname, Guyana, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, 
Mauritania, Togo, and Comoros, recorded a decrease in their articles (pmp). The highest 
decrease was reported for Kuwait (43 articles), while the decrease for the others was by 
only 3 articles. Yet still, Kuwait continues to rank in the fourth place with respect to 
articles per million people. 
➢ Overall, according to 2009 data, there 
Figure 52: Top 15 OIC Countries by Articles per are only 16 members performing 
Million People (2009) 
above the OIC average in terms of 
articles per million people. Turkey, 
with 284 articles took the lead, and 
followed by Tunisia (213), Iran (181), 
Kuwait (172), and Qatar (169). 
United Arab Emirates, Jordan, 
Lebanon, Bahrain, and Malaysia also 
ranked at the top 10, having 
produced around 140-160 articles per 
million people. Oman, Brunei Saudi 
Arabia, Egypt and Gabon succeeded 
in entering the top 15 rank (see Figure 
51 Top Panel and Figure 52). 
➢ At the other side of the spectrum, 
there are member countries with even less than one article (pmp), like Afghanistan 
Turkmenistan, and Somalia. 
➢ To this end, it is observed that most of the high ranking member countries are located in 
the Middle East. Articles per million people averaged at 98 in this region in 2009, compared 
to 28 in 2000. 
➢ The average for the members in Europe & Central Asia increased from 44 to 147 in that 
period. Excluding Turkey, these averages fall down to 11 and 14, respectively. 
➢ Except for the Latin American members, the averages for the other regions also increased 
in the period under consideration (North Africa: from 30 to 58; East Asia & Pacific: from 5 
to 18; South Asia: from 3 to 12; and Sub-Saharan Africa: from 6 to 11). 
46 
Turkey 
Tunisia 
Iran 
Kuwait 
Qatar 
U.A. Emirates 
Jordan 
Lebanon 
Bahrain 
Malaysia 
Oman 
Brunei 
Saudi Arabia 
Egypt 
Gabon 
284 
213 
181 
172169 
163 
159 
157 
152 
142115112 
80 
58 
550 50 100 150 200 250 300 
5.6 Patent Applications 
Intellectual property rights, especially patents, are the key factors contributing to advances in innovation and scientific development. As a product of R&D activities, patents strengthen the link between science and technology, as the outcomes of research translate into new products or services. In this regard, although not all inventions are patented, the quantity of patent applications may be considered as a proxy for the degree of innovative capability in a country. 
According to statistics from the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), the total number of patent applications around the world in 2008 is estimated to have been 1.85 million, and less than 1% of them were filed in OIC member countries –for which data are available. USA, Japan, China, and Republic of Korea accounted for about 70% of the total patent applications in the world. To shed light on the situation in individual OIC member countries, Table 1 presents statistics on patent applications in countries for which data are available. 
Table 1: Patent Applications by Office: Residents and Non-residents* Country Residents Non Res. Total Year Country Residents Non Res. Total Year Iran 5,970 557 6,527 2006 Bangladesh 29 270 299 2007 Malaysia 818 4,485 5,303 2008 Syria 124 133 257 2006 Indonesia 282 4,324 4,606 2006 Azerbaijan 222 5 227 2008 Turkey 2,221 176 2,397 2008 Kazakhstan 11 162 173 2008 Egypt 516 1,589 2,105 2007 Kyrgyz Rep. 135 3 138 2008 Pakistan 170 1,375 1,545 2008 Brunei 0 75 75 2008 Morocco 177 834 1,011 2008 Mozambique 18 22 40 2007 Algeria 84 765 849 2007 Yemen 11 24 35 2007 Saudi Arabia 128 642 770 2007 Tajikistan 26 0 26 2006 Jordan 59 507 566 2007 Sudan 3 13 16 2007 Uzbekistan 262 186 448 2008 Uganda 6 1 7 2007 Tunisia 56 282 338 2005 Bahrain 3 2004 Lebanon 316 2006 Burkina Faso 1 0 1 2005 
Source: World Intellectual Property Organization, Statistics on Patents, September 2010. * The numbers of patent applications for most African OIC countries are not provided individually as these countries are members of the African Regional Intellectual Property Organization (ARIPO). Total number of patents filed to ARIPO in 2008 is 435. Resident/non-resident breakdown is not provided for Lebanon and Bahrain. 
In this respect, the following observations can be made to summarize the situation in the OIC member countries: 
➢ Patent activity is highest in Iran, Malaysia, and Indonesia. In 2006, total patent applications (by residents and non-residents) amounted to 6,527 in Iran and 4,606 in Indonesia. In 2008, total patent applications amounted to 5,303 in Malaysia. ➢ In most of the OIC countries, applications by non-residents are higher than those filed by residents; in fact, in half of the 26 countries with available data, they account for more than 
47 
75% of the total applications. In quantity, they are highest in Malaysia (4,485) and Indonesia (4,324), accounting for, respectively, 85% and 94% of the total applications. ➢ Applications by residents dominate only in eight of the member countries, and, in 
quantity, they are highest in Iran (5,970) and Turkey (2,221). 
5.7 Knowledge Economy Indices 
5.7.1 Knowledge Assessment Methodology 
As the global economy forces the limits of tangible resources in the modern era, knowledge based resources gain more importance in determining the growth, welfare and competitiveness of countries the application of knowledge creates significant comparative advantages through providing more efficient and less costly ways of ―doing the business‖ in areas such as entrepreneurship, innovation, R&D, software and design, education, etc. 
For most of the countries including the member countries of OIC, the transition to the Knowledge Economy is not an easy goal to achieve: It requires an extensive search about the country’s needs and capabilities in order to develop effective strategies, to direct potential investments and to coordinate institutions accordingly. In this regard, the Knowledge Assessment Methodology (KAM) designed by the World Bank, acts as an interactive benchmarking tool for helping countries identify the challenges and opportunities they face in making the transition to the knowledge-based economy. Using a wide range of relevant factors affecting the overall performance of an economy, it also provides a cross-sectoral approach and presents a country’s ability to generate, diffuse and apply knowledge rather than just focusing on one area. 
Figure 53: Knowledge Indexes 
Source: World Bank, Knowledge Assessment Methodology 
48 
Under this methodology, a country’s preparedness to compete in the knowledge economy is measured using 109 structural and qualitative variables15, which are used as proxies for the four pillars of the Knowledge Economy Framework (Figure 53): 
1) Economic Incentive and Institutional Regime: An economic and institutional regime provides incentives for the efficient use of existing and new knowledge and the flourishing of entrepreneurship. 
2) Education: An educated and skilled population shares and uses knowledge well. 
3) Innovation: An efficient innovation system of firms, research centers, universities, consultants and other organizations adds into the growing stock of global knowledge, assimilates and adapts it to local needs, and forms new technology. 
4) Information and Communications Technologies: Information and communication technology facilitates the effective dissemination, and processing of information. 
Depending on these 4 pillars, KAM presents two indices16 to track the overall level of preparedness of the countries towards knowledge based economy: 
A) Knowledge Economy Index (KEI): takes into account whether the environment is conducive for knowledge to be used effectively for economic development. It is an aggregate index that represents the overall level of development of a country or region towards the Knowledge Economy. It is the average of the normalized performance scores of countries on all four pillars. 
B) Knowledge Index (KI): measures a country's ability to generate, adopt and diffuse knowledge. This is an indication of overall potential of knowledge development in a given country. It is the simple average of normalized performance scores of countries on pillars #2, #3 and #4. 
5.7.2 OIC Member Countries under KAM 
For year 2009, 146 countries were analyzed through KAM and 41 of them were OIC Member Countries. 16 OIC Member Countries not included in KAM 2009 analysis were Afghanistan, Brunei, Chad, Comoros, Gabon, Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Iraq, Libya, Maldives, Niger, Palestine, Somalia, Suriname, Togo and Turkmenistan. 
Figure 54 presents the overall KEI ranking of OIC Member Countries under basic scorecard mode of KAM 2009 framework weighted by population. Accordingly, the following observations can be made: 
15 The variables are normalized on a scale of 0 to 10 relative to other countries in the selected comparison group. 16 For calculating the basic scorecard mode of KEI and KI, each pillar is represented by 3 key variables plus two variables serve as proxies for the overall economic and social performance leading to a total of 14 variables 
49 
➢ In year 2009, Qatar, UAE, Malaysia and Bahrain recorded KEI scores higher than the 
average KEI of the World, 5.95, and were among the top 50 countries in the overall index. 
➢ Though there is still a difference of 1.5 point, the scores of Qatar and UAE are getting 
closer to the average KEI score of high income countries, 8.23, while Malaysia, Bahrain and 
Kuwait are above the upper middle income average of 5.66. 
➢ The KEI scores of 12 OIC Member Countries are higher than the average of middle 
income countries, 3.78. 
➢ Outside the MENA region, Malaysia, Turkey, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Albania, 
Azerbaijan and Guyana are the only countries managing to enter top 100 countries. 
➢ 19 OIC Member Countries improved their rankings compared to 2008. Among them, 
Mauritania, Yemen, Sudan and Pakistan took the lead by moving up 15, 13, 11 and 9 ranks, 
respectively. 
➢ Like Pakistan, Qatar and Saudi Arabia also changed their position up by 9 ranks. 
➢ 4 OIC Member Countries, Malaysia, Mozambique, Uganda and Bangladesh, maintained 
their ranks in year 2009. 
50 
Country (KEI Rank) 
Qatar (44) U.A.E (45) Malaysia (48) Bahrain (49) Kuwait (52) Turkey (61) Jordan (62) Oman (66) Saudi Arabia (68) Kazakhstan (72) Lebanon (76) Guyana (80) Tunisia (82) Kyrgyzstan (84) Egypt (90) Albania (93) Azerbaijan (97) Iran (98) Morocco (99) Indonesia (103) Uzbekistan (104) Tajikistan (106) Algeria (105) Syria (108) Senegal (114) Uganda (117) Mauritania (116) Pakistan (118) Yemen (121) Mali (124) Benin (126) Nigeria (129) Sudan (130) Cameroon (133) Burkina Faso (132) Cote d'Ivoire (135) Mozambique (136) Bangladesh (138) Djibouti (139) Guinea (144) Sierra Leone (145) 
KEI Score (Max=10) 
Source: World Bank, KAM 2009 
6.73 6.73 6.07 6.04 5.85 5.555.54 5.36 5.31 5.054.814.574.42 4.29 4.08 3.96 3.83 3.75 3.54 3.293.25 3.22 3.22 3.09 2.572.36 2.36 2.34 2.20 2.06 2.05 1.84 1.78 1.71 1.71 1.65 1.58 1.48 1.47 1.070.96 
Figure 54: KEI Scores and Ranks of OIC Member Countries, Weighted by Population 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
51 
When the countries are analyzed over time, 4 member countries, namely Qatar, UAE, Oman and Saudi Arabia showed progress compared to their KEI scores in 1995 as shown in Figure 55. Meanwhile, regression is observed for the average KEI score of World. 
Figure 55: Over Time KEI Progress of OIC Member Countries, Weighted by Population 
7 
BH 
6World 
KW 
MY 
AE QA 
5SA 
KG 4AL 
32SL BD CMBJBNCI 
SD 
MLMR UG 
SN 
DZ 
100 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
GY 
TR 
ID IR 
LB 
KZ 
OM 
JO 
PK 
AZ 
EG 
GN 
UZ 
TN 
YE 
MA 
MZNG 5 
991TJ SYDJ 
IMPROVEMENT 
IMPROVEMENT 
Most Recent Source: World Bank, KAM 2009 
Additionally, if the separate scores from each four composite pillars of KEI are also taken into consideration, the top five positions in 2009 were held by: 
• Oman, Qatar, Turkey UAE and Bahrain for Economic Incentive & Institutional Regime; 
• Malaysia, U.A.E, Qatar, Turkey and Jordan for Innovation; 
• Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Guyana and Bahrain for Education; 
• U.A.E, Qatar, Bahrain, Malaysia and Kuwait for ICT. 
Furthermore, the following member countries increased their scores compared to year 1995 for the composite pillars of: 
• Economic Incentive & Institutional Regime (17): Algeria, Azerbaijan, Cameroon, 
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Mauritania, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, 
Tajikistan, Turkey, Uganda, Uzbekistan and Yemen ; 
• Innovation(14): Algeria, Benin, Indonesia, Iran, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritania, Pakistan, 
Qatar, Syria, Tunisia, Turkey, UAE and Yemen; 
• Education (20): Albania, Algeria, Bangladesh, Benin, Burkina Faso, Djibouti, Guinea, 
Guyana, Jordan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Malaysia, Mali, Oman, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, 
Tunisia, UAE, Uganda and Yemen; 
• ICT (3): Malaysia, Qatar and UAE. 
52 
6.57 5 
9Bahrain 
91UAE World 
Malaysia6 
Kuwait 
Qatar Turkey 5.5Jordan Kazakhstan 
Oman Saudi 5 
Arabia 5 5.5 6 6.5 Most Recent 7 
6 Concluding Remarks and Policy Implications 
While many countries are aware of the critical role and impact of education in the socioeconomic development and in equipping the future generation with new skills, knowledge, and ideas, education in OIC member countries, however, faces a myriad of challenges such as lack of financing, staff development, skill-based training, quality of teaching, and scarcity of research fund. Today, OIC countries lag behind the world average as well as the average for developing countries in many aspects of education such as literacy rates, student-teacher ratio, and enrolment rates. Moreover, governments in OIC countries, on average, spend on education less than other countries relative to the size of their economies, though their spending on education accounts for a higher share of the total government expenditures as compared to the others. 
Great disparities also exist among regions and among individual OIC countries. In general, member countries in South Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Middle East & North Africa perform weaker than those in the other regions, implying that countries in these regions should be paid special attention to at least close the gap within the OIC community. 
Looking from the gender perspective to education, it is observed that females in OIC countries have less access to education than males. This disparity is even more remarkable when it is compared to the world average and the average for developing countries. 
Considering the available data, the following conclusions can be drawn for the member countries regarding R&D and scientific development in OIC member countries: 
➢ Although the availability of researchers varies considerably among the OIC member countries, most of them lag behind the world average with inadequate quantity of researchers employed in R&D activities. ➢ Women, as researchers, are underrepresented in R&D activities, yet the OIC average is slightly lower than the world average and many OIC countries have higher shares than even the average for the EU members. ➢ R&D intensity is quite low in the OIC, with only one country spending more than 1% of GDP on R&D while the world average is around 1.8%. On the other hand, some countries have recorded significant increases in their R&D intensity while most of the other countries have reported stable expenditures on R&D. In this regard, although the OIC Ten-Year Programme of Action called upon the member countries to encourage R&D programmes and ensure their individual R&D intensity is not inferior to half of the world average, the OIC countries are currently far away from the target and it seems difficult to meet the Programme target in time under the current trends. Therefore, there needs to be more efforts exerted in this area to close the gap with the world. ➢ In most of the member countries, R&D activities are financed and performed by the public sector while, in few cases, business sector or higher education institutions take the lead. 
53 
➢ In parallel with the low R&D intensity and inadequate technological infrastructure, high technology exports of the OIC member countries remain quite limited, accounting for only 4.3% of the world high technology exports, yet again mostly originated from only two members. ➢ Moreover, high technology products do not occupy much part in manufactured exports of the members, and this does not seem to improve significantly over time except for few of them. ➢ Production of scientific articles is also concentrated in a few of the members. In 2009, the OIC member countries produced more than 63 thousand articles, yet, 71% of them originated from only 5 countries and 24 of the members each produced less than 100 articles. ➢ In the last decade, from 2000 to 2009, the number of articles per million people, on average, increased by 27 articles to reach 42, which is still low given that in some other developing countries it exceeds one thousand. ➢ Patent statistics are not available for most of the member countries. Available data on 26 members indicate that patent applications are below the world average and mostly filed by non-residents, implying that indigenous innovation capability in most of these countries is at low levels. ➢ Although, of the 41 OIC Member Countries analyzed under Knowledge Assessment Methodology in 2009, only 4 countries recorded higher KEI scores than the World average, most of the member countries demonstrated better performance compared to 1995. 
In light of the present situation in education and scientific development summarized above, following policy recommendations can be made: 
➢ A good education policy should be established in each OIC member country and it must extend far beyond formal education, encompassing areas such as social policy, health policy, and economic policy. ➢ More efforts to expand access to education at the primary, secondary, and tertiary levels should be undertaken. Distance learning may be considered as an option to further increase educational opportunities. ➢ Initiatives to increase literacy and enrolment of females in particular should be encouraged 
and supported. ➢ Life-learning courses/programmes may be provided for the people over school age to 
improve their literacy and education. ➢ Digital infrastructure, in particular, should be enhanced and facilitated at every level of 
education. ➢ OIC countries should develop concrete plans for reaching, in foreseeable future, the 1% 
target of R&D share in GDP set by the OIC Ten-Year Programme of Action. ➢ Networking opportunities on R&D among the private sectors of the OIC Member 
Countries should be encouraged. 
54 
➢ OIC countries should take advantage of R&D spillovers by (i) learning about new technologies and methods developed in other countries, and (ii) importing technological goods and services from trade partners. ➢ Companies should be encouraged to increase their R&D expenditures by the government 
through tax concessions and/or R&D subsidies. ➢ R&D should focus on high tech industries, which has higher rate of return, and on sectors 
that OIC countries have comparative advantage. ➢ OIC countries should consider importing services and products that require heavy R&D 
expenditures from other OIC countries. ➢ To enhance higher education and scientific thinking, opening of private colleges/universities 
should be encouraged by OIC countries through financial incentives. ➢ Women should be encouraged to attend colleges/universities and obstacles that prevent them 
from higher education should be removed. ➢ Living standards for scientists should be improved. ➢ Academic research should be promoted through research grants and lesser teaching loads. ➢ Access to research materials should be granted/eased through schools and public libraries. ➢ Student exchange programs and stipends for students who want to continue their higher 
education abroad should be facilitated. ➢ OIC countries should adopt measures to encourage patenting and technology licensing by 
universities and other research organizations. ➢ Initiatives to educate small and medium-sized enterprises about the benefits of investing in 
patents and the use of the patent system should be developed and implemented. ➢ A supranational patent system at the OIC level can be established to give higher incentives for patent development due to increased market size [such a multinational system already exists separately in Europe through EPO and Africa through ARIPO]. ➢ Given the importance of evidence-based policy making and the role of S&T in the development of countries, national statistical offices of the member countries should give special attention to the collection and dissemination of statistical data on science and technology. ➢ Networking opportunities among the OIC member countries need to be facilitated through programmes such as the Framework Programmes of the European Union, to support research and technological development in the Islamic world and to promote joint research initiatives among the member countries. ➢ Joint research and investment on nanotechnology among the OIC member countries should be initiated, as the pioneers of this new technology will benefit enormously from their early investment in this area. 
55 
7 References 
IMF, World Economic Outlook (WEO), Online Database, October 2009. 
ISI Web of Knowledge, Online Database. 
OIC-TYPOA, ―Ten-Year Programme of Action to Meet the Challenges Facing the Muslim Ummah in the 21st Century‖, Third Extraordinary Session of the Islamic Summit Conference, Makkah al Mukarramah - Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, 7-8 December 2005. 
UNESCO Institute for Statistics, ―What do bibliometric indicators tell us about world scientific output?‖, UIS Bulletin on Science and Technology Statistics, Issue 2, September 2005. 
UNESCO Institute for Statistics, Data Centre. 
WIPO, Statistics on Patents, September 2010. 
World Bank, World Development Indicators, Online Database. 
56 
APPENDIX 
Table A.1: Literacy Rates 
COUNTRY Adult Literacy Rate Total Female Male GPI Youth Literacy Rate Total Female Male GPI 
Year 
Afghanistan n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. Albania 99.00 98.70 99.30 0.994 99.40 99.50 99.30 1.002 2008 Algeria 72.65 63.92 81.28 0.786 91.78 89.14 94.38 0.944 2006 Azerbaijan 99.50 99.22 99.80 0.994 100.00 100.00 100.00 1.000 2007 Bahrain 90.80 89.40 91.70 0.975 99.70 99.70 99.80 0.999 2008 Bangladesh 55.00 49.80 60.00 0.830 74.40 75.50 73.30 1.030 2008 Benin 40.80 28.10 53.50 0.525 53.30 42.10 64.10 0.657 2008 Brunei 95.00 93.30 96.60 0.966 99.70 99.60 99.70 0.999 2008 Burkina Faso 28.73 21.58 36.68 0.588 39.26 33.13 46.73 0.709 2007 Cameroon 75.90 67.80 84.00 0.807 85.80 83.50 88.20 0.947 2008 Chad 32.70 21.90 43.80 0.500 45.40 37.20 53.50 0.695 2008 Comoros 73.60 67.80 79.30 0.855 84.90 84.10 85.70 0.981 2008 Côte d'Ivoire 54.60 44.30 64.20 0.690 66.10 60.10 72.00 0.835 2008 Djibouti n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. Egypt 66.37 57.81 74.62 0.775 84.88 81.75 87.86 0.931 2006 Gabon 87.00 83.20 90.90 0.915 97.40 96.40 98.40 0.980 2008 Gambia 45.30 34.30 56.70 0.605 64.10 58.10 70.10 0.829 2008 Guinea 38.00 26.40 49.60 0.532 58.70 50.60 66.50 0.761 2008 Guinea-Bissau 51.00 36.50 66.10 0.552 69.60 61.60 77.60 0.794 2008 Guyana n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. Indonesia 91.98 88.79 95.16 0.933 96.65 96.27 97.03 0.992 2006 Iran 82.33 77.24 87.27 0.885 96.64 96.13 97.15 0.990 2006 Iraq 77.60 69.20 86.00 0.805 82.40 80.20 84.50 0.949 2008 Jordan 92.20 88.90 95.49 0.931 98.95 98.95 98.95 1.000 2007 Kazakhstan 99.70 99.50 99.80 0.997 99.80 99.90 99.80 1.001 2008 Kuwait 94.46 93.12 95.15 0.979 98.45 98.51 98.40 1.001 2007 Kyrgyzstan 99.30 99.10 99.50 0.996 99.60 99.70 99.50 1.002 2008 Lebanon 89.61 85.97 93.38 0.921 98.71 99.08 98.40 1.007 2007 Libya 88.40 81.30 94.90 0.857 99.80 99.70 99.90 0.998 2008 Malaysia 92.10 89.80 94.30 0.952 98.40 98.50 98.30 1.002 2008 Maldives 98.40 98.43 98.37 1.001 99.30 99.36 99.24 1.001 2006 Mali 26.18 18.19 34.86 0.522 38.82 30.80 47.38 0.650 2006 Mauritania 56.80 49.50 64.10 0.772 67.00 63.40 70.50 0.899 2008 Morocco 56.40 44.10 69.40 0.635 76.60 68.40 84.80 0.807 2008 Mozambique 54.00 40.10 69.50 0.577 69.90 62.10 77.70 0.799 2008 Niger 28.67 15.08 42.93 0.351 36.55 23.20 52.45 0.442 2005 Nigeria 60.10 48.80 71.50 0.683 71.50 64.60 78.30 0.825 2008 Oman 86.65 80.90 90.03 0.899 97.63 97.63 97.63 1.000 2008 Pakistan 53.70 39.97 66.84 0.598 68.86 58.77 78.51 0.749 2008 Palestine 94.06 90.90 97.14 0.936 99.15 99.03 99.27 0.998 2008 Qatar 93.08 90.44 93.81 0.964 99.06 98.97 99.10 0.999 2007 Saudi Arabia 85.50 80.20 89.50 0.896 97.30 96.20 98.40 0.978 2008 Senegal 41.89 32.99 52.26 0.631 50.85 44.54 58.13 0.766 2007 Sierra Leone 39.80 28.90 51.70 0.559 55.70 45.90 66.00 0.695 2008 Somalia n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. Sudan 69.30 59.60 79.00 0.754 85.20 81.70 88.60 0.922 2008 Suriname 90.70 88.40 93.00 0.951 95.30 94.80 95.70 0.991 2008 Syria 83.60 77.20 90.00 0.858 94.10 92.50 95.60 0.968 2008 Tajikistan 99.70 99.50 99.80 0.997 99.90 99.90 99.90 1.000 2008 Togo 64.90 53.70 76.60 0.701 83.50 80.00 87.00 0.920 2008 Tunisia 77.56 70.96 86.38 0.822 96.79 95.79 98.13 0.976 2008 Turkey 88.66 81.26 96.20 0.845 96.36 94.29 98.58 0.956 2007 Turkmenistan 99.50 99.30 99.70 0.996 99.80 99.90 99.80 1.001 2008 Uganda 74.60 66.80 82.40 0.811 87.30 85.50 89.10 0.960 2008 UAE 90.03 91.47 89.48 1.022 95.01 97.00 93.63 1.036 2005 Uzbekistan 99.20 98.90 99.50 0.994 99.80 99.70 99.80 0.999 2008 Yemen 60.90 42.80 78.90 0.542 82.90 70.00 95.10 0.736 2008 
OIC 70.22 62.47 77.91 0.802 82.23 78.68 85.75 0.918 World 79.62 73.74 85.59 0.862 88.85 86.60 91.71 0.944 Developing 79.18 73.18 85.28 0.858 89.10 86.28 91.52 0.943 Source: SESRIC, UNESCO 
57 
Table A.2: Number of Students and Teachers, 2008* 
Primary Schools 
ENROLLMENT TEACHERS STUDENT - TEACHER RATIOS COUNTRY 
Secondary 
Tertiary 
Primary 
Secondary 
Tertiary 
Primary 
Tertiary Schools 
Schools 
Schools 
Schools 
Schools 
Schools 
Schools Afghanistan 4,887,523 1,055,829 30,123 113,763 32,817 1,781 42.96 32.17 16.91 Albania 250,487 401,216 57,658 11,653 23,432 2,517 21.50 17.12 22.91 Algeria 3,942,242 3,955,128 948,562 169,701 176,375 32,189 23.23 22.42 29.47 Azerbaijan 496,697 1,151,357 141,896 43,971 137,109 15,284 11.30 8.40 9.28 Bahrain 86,084 77,928 18,403 4,953 6,923 756 17.38 11.26 24.34 Bangladesh 16,001,605 10,454,149 1,195,789 365,925 413,746 60,915 43.73 25.27 19.63 Benin 1,601,146 435,449 43,896 35,938 16,478 1,298 44.55 26.43 33.82 Brunei 45,125 46,826 5,607 3,595 4,439 695 12.55 10.55 8.07 Burkina Faso 1,742,439 423,543 41,779 35,617 13,964 2,245 48.92 30.33 18.61 Cameroon 3,201,477 1,127,691 147,631 69,544 43,193 3,834 46.04 26.11 38.51 Chad 1,495,961 337,449 18,990 23,938 9,555 1,675 62.49 35.32 11.34 Comoros 111,115 46,447 2,234 3,685 3,257 151 30.15 14.26 14.79 Côte d'Ivoire 2,356,240 744,897 160,546 56,248 20,124 n.a. 41.89 37.02 n.a. Djibouti 56,395 41,159 2,375 1,657 1,201 121 34.03 34.27 19.63 Egypt 10,153,791 8,329,822 2,488,434 368,785 490,526 84,135 27.53 16.98 29.58 Gabon 281,371 108,123 7,473 8,023 3,078 585 35.07 35.13 12.77 Gambia 220,931 105,237 1,753 6,429 4,358 155 34.36 24.15 11.31 Guinea 1,364,491 530,705 80,222 30,933 15,941 2,163 44.11 33.29 37.09 Guinea-Bissau 287,196 56,987 3,689 4,527 1,480 25 63.44 38.50 147.56 Guyana 107,456 74,673 7,306 4,204 3,574 816 25.56 20.89 8.95 Indonesia 29,498,266 18,314,900 4,419,577 1,687,371 1,531,383 286,127 17.48 11.96 15.45 Iran 7,027,775 8,187,132 3,391,852 350,525 n.a. 143,503 20.05 n.a. 23.64 Iraq 4,430,267 1,898,756 439,875 217,123 101,678 20,013 20.40 18.67 21.98 Jordan 817,160 700,342 254,752 39,441 34,294 9,681 20.72 20.42 26.31 Kazakhstan 956,019 1,778,106 719,802 57,473 177,552 41,207 16.63 10.01 17.47 Kuwait 208,608 249,784 37,687 22,895 27,496 2,173 9.11 9.08 17.34 Kyrgyzstan 399,833 696,833 296,267 16,524 52,614 17,810 24.20 13.24 16.63 Lebanon 467,311 384,726 196,682 32,875 42,165 23,323 14.21 9.12 8.43 Libya 776,532 732,614 385,341 n.a. n.a. 17,654 n.a. n.a. 21.83 Malaysia 3,103,579 2,499,165 809,947 209,894 168,904 42,355 14.79 14.80 19.12 Maldives 47,082 32,645 73 3,551 2,431 39 13.26 13.43 1.87 Mali 1,823,037 612,012 67,839 35,442 25,990 987 51.44 23.55 68.73 Mauritania 473,688 104,567 12,346 12,724 3,951 353 37.23 26.47 34.97 Morocco 3,878,640 2,273,124 401,093 146,187 107,985 19,103 26.53 21.05 21.00 Mozambique 4,904,434 512,266 31,458 76,558 15,620 3,908 64.06 32.80 8.05 Niger 1,389,194 245,637 12,823 34,117 8,331 996 40.72 29.48 12.87 Nigeria 21,863,215 6,068,160 1,450,784 466,784 213,675 37,000 46.84 28.40 39.21 Oman 271,407 307,094 74,223 22,869 21,370 4,215 11.87 14.37 17.61 Pakistan 18,175,801 9,339,991 973,792 446,925 197,082 53,290 40.67 47.39 18.27 Palestine 390,051 707,892 180,905 13,448 29,246 5,074 29.00 24.20 35.65 Qatar 78,123 66,084 12,545 6,248 6,818 1,111 12.50 9.69 11.29 Saudi Arabia 3,211,387 2,885,035 666,662 298,644 261,731 29,359 10.75 11.02 22.71 Senegal 1,618,303 592,831 91,359 44,416 18,354 n.a. 36.44 32.30 n.a. Sierra Leone 1,332,425 239,579 9,263 32,127 10,924 1,257 41.47 21.93 7.37 Somalia 457,132 86,929 n.a. 12,870 4,504 n.a. 35.52 19.30 n.a. Sudan 4,351,957 1,579,567 204,487 118,637 81,665 4,711 36.68 19.34 43.41 Suriname 69,604 48,134 5,186 4,354 3,546 550 15.99 13.57 9.43 Syria 2,356,403 2,626,228 n.a. 132,099 180,703 n.a. 17.84 14.53 n.a. Tajikistan 692,247 1,019,250 155,420 30,530 61,585 8,797 22.67 16.55 17.67 Togo 1,143,902 408,964 32,502 27,153 11,761 484 42.13 34.77 67.15 Tunisia 1,036,445 1,259,240 350,828 59,977 82,981 18,608 17.28 15.18 18.85 Turkey 6,760,145 6,708,970 2,532,622 453,318 196,713 98,766 14.91 34.11 25.64 Turkmenistan n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. Uganda 7,963,979 1,145,459 107,728 159,516 60,830 3,581 49.93 18.83 30.08 UAE 289,654 318,769 77,428 16,523 24,152 4,710 17.53 13.20 16.44 Uzbekistan 2,071,317 4,497,372 299,010 117,652 357,560 24,011 17.61 12.58 12.45 Yemen 3,282,457 1,455,206 243,964 110,127 58,342 7,549 29.81 24.94 32.32 OIC 186,307,151 110,087,978 24,350,488 6,880,006 5,605,506 1,143,645 27.08 19.62 21.29 World 693,501,860 521,104,233 155,232,286 27,705,374 28,404,685 9,705,565 25.03 18.34 15.99 Developing 627,039,316 442,346,093 113,540,841 23,279,159 22,581,964 6,281,322 26.94 19.59 18.08 Source: SESRIC, UNESCO 
*For the countries that UNESCO did not disseminate the 2008 data, the values were estimated by SESRIC. 
58 
Secondary Schools 
Table A.3: Gross and Net Enrolment Rates, 1999 vs. 2008* 
Primary 
Secondary 
Tertiary COUNTRY 
GER NER GER NER GER 1999 2008 1999 2008 1999 2008 1999 2008 1999 2008 Afghanistan 28.81 106.12 n.a. n.a. 12.74 28.59 26.85 26.85 1.26 1.28 Albania 109.73 102.13 99.54 90.80 73.73 77.71 69.54 73.78 15.55 19.27 Algeria 105.15 107.53 90.69 94.86 75.01 83.22 63.84 66.34 14.16 24.02 Azerbaijan 97.69 116.22 88.68 96.03 78.45 105.62 75.30 98.32 15.72 15.75 Bahrain 107.49 105.26 95.88 97.85 95.15 96.80 85.19 89.36 21.77 29.94 Bangladesh 93.66 91.90 87.23 85.46 42.40 44.13 39.57 41.48 4.85 6.98 Benin 83.11 116.56 86.52 92.82 21.71 36.29 18.08 19.55 3.35 5.85 Brunei 113.79 106.73 93.39 93.29 85.02 96.74 87.44 88.18 12.33 16.04 Burkina Faso 43.90 73.42 35.18 60.13 9.74 18.40 8.59 14.37 0.98 3.06 Cameroon 83.56 110.92 88.30 88.30 25.06 37.30 n.a. n.a. 4.69 7.82 Chad 63.07 82.71 51.44 60.97 9.85 19.02 6.85 10.48 0.80 1.92 Comoros 98.66 119.40 64.53 72.91 29.99 45.77 n.a. n.a. 1.20 2.70 Côte d'Ivoire 73.00 74.46 55.41 56.04 22.56 26.27 18.45 21.16 6.15 8.37 Djibouti 33.45 46.24 27.49 41.23 14.04 29.79 13.98 21.54 0.71 2.63 Egypt 92.64 99.67 85.39 93.62 74.33 79.31 71.03 71.24 35.18 28.45 Gabon 138.90 134.32 80.27 80.27 48.21 53.08 n.a. n.a. 7.06 7.06 Gambia 92.36 86.23 75.77 68.74 32.01 50.80 26.27 41.80 1.11 1.23 Guinea 55.97 89.90 43.40 71.34 13.71 35.80 11.75 27.70 2.19 9.22 Guinea-Bissau 80.12 119.66 51.90 52.10 19.85 35.85 9.74 9.74 2.47 2.85 Guyana 117.52 108.68 94.68 94.68 80.35 102.07 n.a. n.a. 6.37 11.51 Indonesia 112.74 119.49 94.29 95.70 56.23 74.38 49.70 68.37 14.85 21.26 Iran 109.07 128.39 92.87 99.68 79.53 79.70 75.11 75.11 17.53 36.14 Iraq 95.54 98.03 87.53 87.34 33.88 46.78 29.75 39.59 11.40 15.70 Jordan 98.08 96.83 91.00 89.49 87.80 88.22 79.28 81.92 27.23 40.65 Kazakhstan 97.32 108.45 87.21 90.34 92.04 92.02 87.01 85.36 24.50 46.92 Kuwait 99.97 95.47 86.55 87.61 98.40 89.82 88.55 79.88 22.67 18.90 Kyrgyzstan 97.76 94.70 88.01 83.53 83.44 85.09 82.09 80.46 28.98 51.96 Lebanon 110.49 101.07 90.63 88.34 77.05 81.55 74.45 74.59 33.29 51.53 Libya 119.58 110.32 n.a. n.a. 108.29 93.48 n.a. n.a. 50.23 55.74 Malaysia 98.42 96.61 97.72 96.10 65.48 68.19 65.15 67.91 22.98 32.11 Maldives 134.47 112.01 97.56 96.22 41.83 83.65 30.72 69.42 n.a. n.a. Mali 56.47 91.32 44.36 71.51 15.34 34.80 28.58 28.58 1.97 5.44 Mauritania 85.89 98.22 62.17 76.53 18.22 24.46 14.05 16.30 5.19 3.83 Morocco 85.90 106.94 70.34 89.47 36.66 55.85 30.21 34.51 9.44 12.29 Mozambique 69.59 114.19 52.38 79.89 5.18 20.55 2.66 6.22 0.60 1.45 Niger 30.42 57.83 25.69 49.47 6.69 10.96 5.79 8.89 0.95 1.16 Nigeria 91.03 93.09 60.04 61.40 23.86 30.48 26.16 25.81 5.96 10.07 Oman 91.36 74.96 80.90 68.26 75.19 88.12 64.65 78.22 14.25 26.89 Pakistan 69.32 84.78 56.95 66.13 26.84 32.91 22.15 32.52 2.50 5.18 Palestine 105.47 79.63 96.75 75.31 80.30 89.72 77.05 87.29 24.56 47.21 Qatar 100.57 108.60 90.40 94.11 87.25 93.25 73.70 79.17 24.47 10.98 Saudi Arabia 96.61 98.38 82.97 84.55 89.96 94.56 67.61 73.05 19.96 29.85 Senegal 65.30 83.50 55.07 72.93 15.54 30.61 16.26 25.08 3.34 8.00 Sierra Leone 69.51 157.74 n.a. n.a. 26.51 34.57 24.94 24.94 2.06 2.05 Somalia 32.56 32.56 n.a. n.a. 7.72 7.72 n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. Sudan 46.72 68.65 39.24 39.24 24.93 33.46 n.a. n.a. 5.98 5.93 Suriname 118.05 113.81 91.05 90.12 73.42 75.37 64.77 64.57 12.32 12.32 Syria 102.26 124.40 91.82 94.51 40.27 73.96 36.05 67.74 n.a. n.a. Tajikistan 98.46 102.18 95.93 97.33 74.29 84.43 62.92 82.52 13.62 20.15 Togo 116.38 115.16 82.90 93.53 28.46 41.25 19.58 22.50 4.69 5.29 Tunisia 115.89 107.07 94.86 97.71 73.57 91.83 63.46 71.28 17.32 33.70 Turkey 98.55 99.30 92.23 94.69 68.15 81.96 61.74 73.94 21.62 38.37 Turkmenistan n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. Uganda 126.49 120.25 95.46 97.09 9.68 25.35 7.90 21.58 1.91 3.69 UAE 89.82 107.94 78.88 91.58 76.28 93.77 69.06 83.82 17.59 25.19 Uzbekistan 98.71 108.71 89.92 88.05 86.47 101.40 91.69 91.28 12.84 9.95 Yemen 71.41 85.39 55.92 72.68 40.61 45.66 31.57 37.44 10.11 10.23 OIC 89.62 99.89 76.83 81.77 49.99 60.40 46.06 52.69 12.17 17.10 World 98.79 103.72 84.05 87.82 67.47 74.55 59.28 64.70 22.21 30.78 Developing 97.96 103.93 81.38 85.93 59.84 68.62 53.37 59.58 16.56 23.87 Source: SESRIC, UNESCO 
*For the countries that UNESCO did not disseminate the latest data, the values were estimated by SESRIC based on the previous data. 
59 
Table A.4: Government Expenditures on Education 
Per Pupil US $ % of GDP per Capita 19991 20082 19991 20082 19991 20082 19991 20082 Afghanistan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Albania 2.9 2.9 8.4 8.4 ... ... ... ... Algeria 4.3 4.3 20.3 20.3 ... ... ... ... Azerbaijan 4.2 1.9 24.4 11.9 74 177 13.0 7.2 Bahrain 3.4 2.9 12.8 11.7 ... ... ... ... Bangladesh 2.4 2.4 15.3 14.0 51 66 13.2 13.3 Benin 3.0 3.6 15.6 15.9 60 103 17.0 19.4 Brunei 4.9 3.7 9.3 9.1 ... ... ... ... Burkina Faso 4.5 4.6 16.4 21.8 140 157 35.5 34.1 Cameroon 1.9 2.9 9.8 14.6 134 149 14.3 12.3 Chad 1.6 1.9 7.7 10.1 34 75 11.6 12.8 Comoros 3.8 7.6 24.1 24.1 ... ... ... ... Côte d'Ivoire 5.3 4.6 21.5 24.6 254 186 34.1 30.0 Djibouti 7.6 8.7 22.4 22.8 ... ... ... ... Egypt 4.9 3.8 16.2 11.9 ... ... ... ... Gabon 3.1 3.8 ... ... ... ... ... ... Gambia 3.0 2.0 14.2 8.9 30 30 8.4 8.4 Guinea 2.0 1.7 25.6 19.2 38 38 7.5 7.5 Guinea-Bissau 5.2 5.2 11.9 11.9 ... ... ... ... Guyana 8.6 6.1 18.4 12.5 148 229 14.3 16.3 Indonesia 2.5 3.5 11.5 18.7 292 292 15.1 15.1 Iran 4.5 4.8 18.7 20.0 189 842 11.6 17.8 Iraq ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Jordan 4.9 4.9 20.6 20.6 ... ... ... ... Kazakhstan 3.9 2.8 14.4 12.1 ... ... ... ... Kuwait 6.6 3.8 14.8 12.9 4,829 6,513 30.9 17.8 Kyrgyzstan 4.1 6.6 21.4 25.6 ... ... ... ... Lebanon 2.0 2.0 10.4 8.1 ... ... ... ... Libya 2.7 2.7 ... ... ... ... ... ... Malaysia 5.7 4.5 25.2 18.2 908 1,219 22.5 17.3 Maldives 8.1 8.1 15.0 12.0 765 765 24.8 24.8 Mali 3.0 3.8 13.3 19.5 69 129 24.1 19.1 Mauritania 2.9 4.4 8.3 15.6 80 74 16.9 12.6 Morocco 5.4 5.7 25.7 25.7 403 544 28.9 27.9 Mozambique 2.1 5.0 22.6 21.0 65 65 23.3 23.3 Niger 2.3 3.7 13.2 15.5 91 118 33.8 33.2 Nigeria ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Oman 4.0 4.0 21.3 31.1 1,387 1,711 17.2 14.5 Pakistan 2.6 2.9 6.4 11.2 ... ... ... ... Palestine ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Qatar 2.1 3.3 19.6 19.6 ... ... ... ... Saudi Arabia 7.1 5.7 26.0 19.3 ... ... ... ... Senegal 3.1 5.1 20.1 19.0 202 275 26.2 25.2 Sierra Leone 4.9 3.8 ... ... ... ... ... ... Somalia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sudan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Suriname ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Syria 5.3 4.9 18.4 16.7 ... ... ... ... Tajikistan 2.1 3.5 11.8 18.7 ... ... ... ... Togo 4.2 3.7 26.2 17.2 62 62 15.3 15.3 Tunisia 6.9 7.2 17.4 22.4 546 776 24.6 26.4 Turkey 2.7 3.0 10.3 13.6 500 1,311 12.5 13.1 Turkmenistan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Uganda 2.5 3.8 18.3 18.9 43 43 14.3 14.3 United Arab Emirates 2.0 0.9 22.2 27.2 2,502 2,474 11.5 10.6 Uzbekistan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Yemen 9.9 5.2 32.8 16.0 ... ... ... ... OIC 2.9 2.6 16.4 16.9 265 461 16.3 16.5 World 4.0 4.1 13.2 12.7 1,485 2,264 20.5 21.2 Developing 2.8 2.9 14.5 15.6 274 478 18.1 18.2 1 Data refer to 1999 or earliest available year. 2 Data refer to 2008 or latest available year. Source: UNESCO 
% of GDP % of Total 
Government Exp. 
60
Technology in Education - Higher Education
Education Encyclopedia - StateUniversity.comEducation EncyclopediaTechnology in Education - School, Higher Education - CURRENT TRENDS

HIGHER EDUCATION
Colleges and universities have generally been quick to adopt new technologies, often even before their educational value has been proven. Throughout its history, higher education has experimented with technological advances as diverse as the blackboard and the personal computer. Some technologies have become permanent parts of the higher education enterprise. Others, such as the slide rule and the 16-millimeter movie projector, have been replaced as more sophisticated or more cost-effective technologies have emerged to take their place.

At the dawn of the twenty-first century, new and rapidly improving technologies are in the process of transforming higher education. Each year since 1994, the Campus Computing Survey has shown increased use in college classrooms of technology-dependent resources such as e-mail, the Internet, course web pages, and computer simulations. Technology has the potential to revolutionize the traditional teaching and learning process. It can eliminate the barriers to education imposed by space and time and dramatically expand access to lifelong learning. Students no longer have to meet in the same place at the same time to learn together from an instructor. Fundamentally, modern technologies have the ability to change the conception of a higher education institution. No longer is a higher education institution necessarily a physical place with classrooms and residence halls where students come to pursue an advanced education. Thanks to recent developments in technology, the standard American image of a college or university as a collection of ivycovered buildings may need to be revised for the first time since the founding of Harvard in 1636.

Computers and telecommunications are the principal technologies reshaping higher education. Due to advances in each of these domains, electronic mail, fax machines, the World Wide Web, CDROMs, and commercially developed simulations and courseware are altering the daily operations and expanding the missions of colleges and universities.

Forces Promoting and Inhibiting Technology Use
Powerful forces are promoting higher education's adoption of new technologies. The rapid advance of globalization that is lowering international barriers and transforming the business world is also expanding the potential reach of colleges and universities. With sophisticated communication technologies, institutions of higher education are no longer limited to student markets or educational resources in their geographic regions. Likewise, the growing need for lifelong learning opportunities to keep pace with social, economic, and technological changes fuels demand for accessible alternatives to traditional real-time, campus-based instruction. In addition, competition among higher education institutions contributes to technology's advance within colleges and universities. Not wishing to be outpaced by competitors, many institutions are active participants in a technology "arms race" that requires the rapid adoption of new technological innovations as soon as they become available. The alternative is to fall behind other schools that are attempting to recruit the same students, faculty, and donors.

In spite of technology's promise, its integration throughout higher education has not been rapid or painless. Many barriers to technology-based innovations exist within colleges and universities. Academic traditions, such as the faculty-centered lecture, make many professors reluctant to adopt alternative instructional strategies using the computer or telecommunication devices. The cost of many technological applications also prohibits their easy adoption at many resource-limited institutions. Before technology became such a central part of institutional operations, many colleges paid for new or improved technologies from funds left over at the end of their annual budget cycle. Now that technology has become an essential and recurring investment, most schools must locate additional funds to meet their increasing needs for technology resources.

Limited support to help faculty and staff members learn how to take full advantage of technology is another factor inhibiting more widespread use of technology in colleges and universities. According to the 2000 Campus Computing Survey, the single most important educational technology challenge facing colleges and universities is helping faculty integrate information technology into their teaching. The second most important challenge is providing adequate user support. According to Kenneth Green, director of the Campus Computing Project, higher education's investment in technology hardware is, by itself, not sufficient to reap the full benefits of new technology advances. Green concludes that "the real [information technology] challenge is people, not products" (p. 1). Technology will neither reap its full potential nor revolutionize higher education if these barriers to its adoption are not resolved satisfactorily by individual institutions or the educational system as a whole.

Impact on Teaching and Learning
No aspect of higher education remains untouched by the technological developments of the 1980s and 1990s. Academic administration, as well as the instructional process, has been dramatically altered by new technologies. When compared to other college and university operations such as student services, housing, and administration, however, the teaching and learning process probably is being changed most dramatically by technology.

Traditionally, professors have used much of their class time with students to disseminate information through lectures and follow-up discussion. This was especially the case in introductory-level courses, where students lack a foundation in the basic concepts and principles of a field. In an era of advanced technology, this approach to instruction seems archaic and inefficient. Computers, especially web-based resources, can disseminate basic information more efficiently and more cost effectively than human beings can. For example, Gregory Farrington recommends that instructors use the web to do what it can do well. This includes presenting information to students in a variety of formats, twenty-four hours per day. Students can access course material when it is most convenient for them and return to it as often as they need to achieve basic comprehension, competence, or mastery.

This approach to information dissemination can save precious class time "for the intellectual interactions that only humans can provide" (Farrington, p. 87). Following this revised method of facilitating learning, traditional lectures can be replaced or pared down. In their place, classes can be more informal, seminar-like sessions with more free flowing discussion structured by students' interests, questions, and concerns. In other words, appropriate use of technology applications can help instructors to structure more active learning opportunities. Research shows that active engagement in the learning process helps to motivate students and enhance their learning outcomes. New technologies can facilitate active engagement in learning by reducing the amount of class time where students sit passively listening to lectures.

Technology can also help to make education a much more interactive and collaborative process. Email, course-based websites, and computer-based chat rooms are some of the technology-enabled resources that facilitate communication and teamwork among students. Research by education scholars has shown that collaborative learning opportunities enhance recall, understanding, and problem solving. Technology can greatly ease the work of collaborative design teams, peer writing groups, and other types of collaborative learning groups, even among students who do not live in the same geographic area and who cannot meet face to face.

While technology helps to promote collaborative learning, it also helps to personalize and individualize education. By reducing the need to deliver vast amounts of information, technology can free an instructor to devote more time to individual students. With more time to interact and get acquainted, professors can adapt their teaching strategies and assignments to bring them more in line with the interests and needs of the students in their classes. Technology's capacity to deliver large quantities of information over networks also expands the potential for tailoring educational programs to the specific needs of each learner. Dewayne Matthews argues that technology-enhanced programs "can be custom-designed around the needs and interests of the recipient instead of around the scheduling and resource needs of the provider" (p. 3). With the help of technology, educational programs\96even full degrees\96can be structured around flexible course modules that students can combine in a variety of forms to meet their personal and professional objectives. Matthews suggests that technology-mediated education makes traditional academic calendars and rigid curriculum structures obsolete because it can adapt education so well to individual learning interests and needs.

If education's goal is to help the learner reach his or her full potential, why should education be designed for the convenience of the instructor or the educational institution? Essentially, technology is empowering learners to take more control of their education than ever before. The expanded reach that technology affords educational institutions has encouraged many new providers to offer educational services. This increased competition enables consumers to choose the learning opportunities that best meet their needs within the constraints of their life circumstances. As technology transforms the educational marketplace, the balance of power is shifting from the education provider to the education consumer. Education consumers are now freer to pick and choose, from a variety of sources, the learning opportunities that meet their goals. In this fluid educational environment, the old system of accumulating credits from one or two nearby institutions becomes too restrictive for many students who are balancing a variety of personal and professional roles.

There is a related shift underway as technology transforms the teaching and learning process. The traditional higher education measure of educational achievement, the credit hour, is also being questioned. Matthews argues that "learning outcomes, as measured by student competencies [rather than course credits], is the quality measure that makes the most sense to consumers" (p. 4). In the new educational environment defined by technology, innovative institutions such as Western Governors University award degrees by certifying that students have achieved certain required competencies, regardless of where those competencies were acquired. Such a dramatic shift in the way educational achievement is documented would have been unthinkable before the advent of the free market educational system stimulated by the technology advances of the late twentieth century. Measuring competencies rather than credit hours represents another shift in favor of the consumer. As long as a student can document competence in a subject or skill area, it makes no difference where or how the learning occurred.

Technology's potential to lower the cost of education has been one of its principal appeals. The ability of computers and telecommunications to reach large audiences with the same high-quality educational programs has raised hopes for economies of scale never possible in the very labor-intensive traditional forms of instruction. To date, technology's promise to lower instructional costs has not been realized. Developing the infrastructure to support technology-mediated teaching and learning has been a very expensive proposition. The possibility remains, however, that new, advanced technologies may eventually lower the costs of higher education as researchers and educators learn how to blend technology-delivered and traditional instruction in a more cost-effective manner.

Impact on Professors' Roles
Technology has already changed the lives of college professors in significant ways. As the twenty-first century unfolds, professors' roles will most likely evolve further as computers and telecommunications media are more fully integrated into higher education. Professors can now use technology to prepare for classes, conduct research, deliver instruction, and keep in touch with their students and colleagues in far away places. Electronic mail, fax machines, computerized databases and search engines, and high-tech classrooms are some of the technologies that have transformed the work of college professors. Many experts on teaching and learning and instructional technology are suggesting that a fundamental shift in faculty duties is underway as more technology applications are adopted in higher education. Because technology calls into question the professor's role as a knowledge transmitter, educational reformers such as James Duderstadt, former president of the University of Michigan, suggest that professors should become "designers of learning experiences, processes, and environments" (p. 7).

Rather than serving primarily as a subject expert who shares specialized knowledge with students, this new type of professor acts more as a consultant or coach. With the aid of technology, his primary instructional role is to inspire and motivate students, to construct an environment that promotes learning, and ultimately to manage an active learning process. Ideally, in this carefully designed context, students take more responsibility for their learning and construct meaning themselves, rather than passively absorbing information from a professor. According to conventional wisdom in contemporary higher education, the professor has moved from being "a sage on the stage to a guide on the side." This individual knows his subject deeply, but is also skilled at constructing situations conducive to learning. Effective utilization of instructional technology is part of the twenty-first-century professor's redefined duties.

There has been some discussion that technology may eventually make many instructional positions obsolete, the same way it eliminated the need for telephone operators or police to direct traffic at busy intersections. Why employ undistinguished professors to lecture in classes when sophisticated telecommunications technology can bring world-renowned authorities into classrooms via satellite or the World Wide Web to inspire students and share the latest information in their fields? Critics of this proposal counter by arguing that big academic "stars" do not hold office hours, grade papers, construct exams, or counsel troubled students. They believe that professors should not lose their jobs to automation. According to this view, there will always be a need for many of the conventional faculty functions, such as designing learning opportunities, motivating students, and evaluating performance.

The future probably lies somewhere between these two contrasting options. Higher education will undoubtedly supplement its local talent with other human resources that have become easily accessible through technology. Yet it will also continue to employ professional staff members to design curriculum, manage academic programs, and work closely with students.

Technology is loosening professors' control of the curriculum. Faculty and academic administrators once wielded nearly absolute power over the academic programs their institutions offered. However, technology has now made it possible\96and commercially viable\96for publishers, software companies, and other providers to design and distribute a wide variety of courseware and instructional modules. This alternative to "in-house" production of courses and academic programs is appealing for financial as well as educational reasons. Spreading the development costs of technology-enhanced educational products permits the integration of sophisticated instructional strategies, such as gaming and simulations, into educational programs. On the other hand, moving the design of educational programs further from those who know an institution's students best causes many educators some concern. Technological advances usually lead to trade-offs. In this case, the benefit of being able to integrate high-tech elements into courses is counterbalanced by the reduction in local control of the curriculum.

Rethinking the Concept of College
Since higher education institutions first emerged, they have been physical places where people gather together to learn. Although higher education institutions have grown and become more complex over time, their basic essence has remained constant. Technology now calls into question the very idea of a college or university. Some accredited institutions of higher education, such as Jones International University, now exist entirely in cyberspace with no campus, classrooms, or athletic teams to tie together the academic community. The traditional campus-based institutions that have served the United States so well are being challenged in the early twenty-first century by a host of nontraditional competitors that offer education at a distance. Many of these entrepreneurial institutions are aided by an assortment of technologies, including computers, satellites, and electronic streaming video. Technology has vastly expanded the demand for education over the course of a lifetime. It has also released education from the confines of the conventional classroom. It has even removed the restrictions imposed by the clock by enabling people who have access to Internet technology to convene for the purpose of shared learning.

The multipurpose American university was so successful because it brought together the array of facilities, experts, students, and funding needed to educate the masses and expand the boundaries of knowledge in service to humanity. The university assembled the critical mass of talent and resources necessary to meet the knowledge needs of a dynamic society. Although this formula worked throughout the twentieth century, technology is challenging this comfortable arrangement. It has enabled many other organizations, such as corporate colleges and for-profit firms, to provide educational services such as degree programs, professional certificate programs, and a host of outreach services that were once monopolized by the higher education community.

The result of this "unbundling" of higher education roles remains in doubt. Technology has led to a vast expansion of the postsecondary education market, and it is calling into question conventional views of what a higher education institution is or should be. However, no one knows precisely what a college or university (physical or virtual) will look like once the other side of the technology revolution is reached. In the past, when higher education adopted technological innovations, the educational system became more open, more complex, and more dynamic. If the past history of higher education can serve as a guide to its future, the technologies now working their way into the system will lead to a more diverse and responsive educational enterprise. How that enterprise resembles the system that functioned throughout the 1900s remains to be seen.

Special Challenges of Technology
In spite of its nearly irresistible appeal, technology presents higher education with difficult challenges. Systematic planning of technological enhancements to educational programs is difficult when technology changes so quickly and unpredictably. Academic planners are continually playing catch-up to implement new technology applications that appear more quickly than a careful planning process can anticipate. Similarly, paying for new technologies with exciting educational applications remains troublesome for institutions with more needs than resources. Authors who wrestle with the funding issues raised by technology argue that new budgeting strategies are necessary to keep institutions from lurching from one technology-funding crisis to the next. Institutions must view technology as a routine expense, not an exceptional special expenditure.

Training faculty and staff members to utilize technology effectively remains a challenge that many colleges and universities have not resolved satisfactorily. It seems clear that building a physical technological infrastructure is not enough. It is also necessary to build a human resource infrastructure for technology to fulfill its promise to higher education.

Finally, adequate evaluation of technology's contribution to higher education remains a challenge. For example, in Teaching with Technology, Wake Forest University vice president David Brown concludes that "the case for computers [in collegiate education] rests on scant amounts of hard evidence"(p. 5). Much of the immense investment in technology that occurred in the 1980s and 1990s was to a large extent an act of faith. Brown argues that the logic in favor of using technology in higher education is compelling, however. He believes that "more choice leads to more learning" (p. 4), and that technology greatly enhances the "box of tools" a professor can employ to reach diverse students. According to Brown, most of the evidence that supports using computers in education is indirect. In his view, research demonstrates that repetition, dialog (question and answer, point and counterpoint), collaborative learning, and visualization and animation (using pictures to support learning) enhance learning. Because computers and other technologies can support these proven educational strategies, Brown concludes that the weight of logic comes down firmly on the side of technology use in colleges and universities. Although Brown makes a strong case for technology, more empirical evidence is needed to justify higher education's massive investment in computers, high-tech classrooms, distancelearning programs, and other technology-based initiatives.

An Emerging New System
Duderstadt asserts that the United States needs a new educational paradigm in order to deliver educational opportunity to a broader spectrum of humanity. The advanced technologies available at the beginning of the twenty-first century are laying the foundation of a new higher education system, better equipped to meet the needs of a complex and rapidly changing society. The outlines of this system, transformed by technology, have begun to appear. The educational system that George Connick believes will eventually result from the current technology revolution has four defining attributes. First, it is easier to access than the old campus-based system. Second, it is unconstrained by the barriers of time and space because technology can liberate education from the restrictions imposed both by the clock and geography. Third, it is student-centered because technology can increase students' learning options. Fourth, it is cost-effective because technology can reduce the labor-intensive nature of higher education and permit the reorganization necessary to make institutions more responsive and competitive.

No one knows what higher education will look like in 2025 or 2100. It is certain, however, that colleges and universities will be very different places than they were in the year 2000. Many factors will contribute to the changes that will occur as the higher education system moves into the future. There is no doubt that technology will be one of the driving forces contributing to the educational transformation that is already well underway.
﻿DEVELOPMENT OF TECHNICAL CREATIVITY IN HIGHER EDUCATION Laurentiu Slatineanu “Gheorghe Asachi” Technical University of Iași, Romania slati@tcm.tuiasi.ro Valeriu Dulgheru Technical University of Chișinău, Republic of Moldova dulgheru@mail.utm.md Felicia Banciu “Politehnica” University of Timișoara, Romania Margareta Coteata “Gheorghe Asachi” Technical University of Iași, Romania Gheorghe Nagit “Gheorghe Asachi” Technical University of Iași, Romania Irina Besiliu “Ştefan cel Mare” University of Suceava, Romania Oana Dodun “Gheorghe Asachi” Technical University of Iași, Romania Abstract: Technical higher education should provide to student/future engineer scientific and technical knowledge and skills for understanding and using various technical equipment, and also for designing and developing new or improved such equipment. In the paper, the necessity and some ways of developing the students’ technical creativity are approached. One may appreciate that there could be a certain correlation between the gross domestic product per capita, number of patents recorded yearly per million inhabitants and the interest directed to the stimulation of creativity in the technical higher education. Activities aiming the stimulation of students’ technical creativity, addressed in technical higher education system and the results obtained are presented. The experience accumulated in some universities of Romanian language is also succinctly described. The contents of university subjects aiming to provide to students knowledge and skills for developing their technical creativity are mentioned. Within applicative activities attached to these university subjects, various methods for stimulating the technical creativity were used. Thus, the students could learn ways in which they could find new or improved solutions for technical problems and also how they can protect the intellectual rights deriving from these solutions. The main conclusion refers to the importance of finding adequate ways and contents of activities aiming the stimulation of students’ technical creativity. Keywords: technical creativity, engineering education, gross domestic product per capita, number of patents, students’ creativity stimulation, universities of Romanian language 213 1. INTRODUCTION The higher education is considered as a tertiary education system, able to offer high professional knowledge and competences in certain fields of activity. Essentially, the higher education is achieved in universities and colleges for a duration of minimum three years and the obtained qualification is recognized by according a higher national diploma. There is also a second type of higher education, which refers to postgraduate studies. If we take into consideration the technical field, the graduates can obtain the title of engineers. Over the years, the engineers had a significant role in the evolution of the material component of the society and this could be frequently justified by their technical creativity; this means that the university should ensure a study environment able to stimulate and develop the technical creativity in a maximum extent. When somebody analyses the creativity, he takes into consideration the capacity to generate at least something new or improved in comparison with the known situation. In 1937, Gordon Allport proposed a definition for creativity as being an integrative way in which the human being was succeeding not only to understand, reproduce or solve many life problems, but also to generate new and original solutions (Căpâlneanu, 1978, p. 105). In such a context, the technical creativity could refer to the capacity of a person to invent objects, processes or methods having a technical character. Due to its high importance in the engineering activity, the technical creativity and the methods able to facilitate its development constituted an objective of researchers’ preoccupation. Thus, Badran highlighted the correlation existing between creativity and innovation, on the one part and the engineering education, on the other part (Badran, 2007). He proposed the generation of an engineering creative enterprise just by a better association between small and medium enterprises creativity and the business support creativity. With this aim in view, the engineering education systems could introduce engineering projects at all levels by earlier considering the industry requirements. Da Silva Alves et al. noticed that the differences of objectives and strategies between universities and companies did not facilitate an efficient collaboration between these structures in the case of Brazil. (Da Silva Alves et al., 2015). They appreciated that new policies are necessary in order to improve the university-industry cooperation and to ensure, in this way, a more intense promotion of the innovation. Gaspar and Mabic developed a research concerning the role of creativity in higher education by using distinct questionnaires for teachers and students in the University of Mostar from Bosnia and Herzegovina (Gaspar and Mabic, 2015). They noticed that if the problem of enhancing creativity in the academic community is formulated, there are differences in opinions between teachers and students. The students appreciated that the teachers do not encourage them enough to be creative and that the model of teaching is still ex cathedra. This means that additional efforts must be made in order to enhance creativity in teaching process, in research, management and other activities. Nisula et al. took into consideration the possibility to foster team creativity and innovativeness in connection with the concept of playfulness and its implementation in practical situations (Nisula et al., 2015). They appreciated that in this way, the creativity and innovativeness could increase the efficiency on an individual level, on a group level and on an organizational level, respectively and that the playfulness could contribute to building open social connectivity and a space where the creativity emerges. A proposal aiming not teaching creativity, but rather understanding and building up the creativity possessed by every student was formulated by Livingston (2010). He expressed the opinion that the education efforts could be focused not on what the teachers want the students know, but on what the teachers want the students could become. The objective of this paper was to highlight the necessity to find and implement activities aiming to stimulate students’ creativity and to present some results obtained in such a direction in several universities of Romanian language. 2. NECESSITY OF TECHNICAL CREATIVITY STIMULATION IN HIGHER EDUCATION 214 The significance of the higher education for the development of a state or a nation is clear; one can consider that without strong institutions of technical higher education, a medium or big state is not able to ensure the prosperity of its inhabitants. The technical higher education should firstly offer to the future graduate professional knowledge and abilities of solving technical problems; the future engineer must know how he can design, develop and apply a technical product or a process. With this aim in view, the university curricula include subjects of designing a product or a process, of using this product or process so that the production activity is efficient. The last decades proved that a training aiming only such objectives is not the best; the future engineer must know not only to design and develop known product and processes, but he must be educated/trained in order to generate improved or new products and processes. The question is if the higher education system is able to offer an adequate training in this direction or if new actions should be undertaken to maximally achieve such a requirement. A possibility to evaluate the innovation capacity of a company, a nation or a state could be based on considering the number of annually recorded patent applications or patented inventions by the national offices with responsibilities in this direction. Table 1: Evolution of population, of total gross domestic product (billions of dollars) and of number of patents for Republic of Korea, Japan, U.S.A., Germany, China, Russia and Romania over the period 2000-2014 Year Republic of Korea Japan U.S.A. Germany Population, millions Total GDP Number of patents Population, millions Total GDP Number of patents Population, millions Total GDP Number of patents Population, millions Total GDP Number of patents 2000 45 975 85783 126* 4083 490776 282* 12975 280390 83 3037 134691 2001 47 1019 88319 127* 4097 506637 285* 13102 290769 83 3089 137731 2002 48* 1095 94248 127* 4109 483806 287* 13336 291806 83* 3089 132836 2003 48* 1127 112754 127 4179 484943 290* 13710 301737 83* 3067 134631 2004 48* 1183 136438 127 4277 510023 293* 14229 330855 83* 3103 146047 2005 48 1229 162694 127* 4333 530005 295* 14705 383242 83 3125 153634 2006 48* 1293 173301 127 4406 517486 298* 15097 404260 83* 3241 160589 2007 49* 1363 176336 127 4503 508263 301* 15366 437353 83* 3347 163779 2008 49* 1402 173496 127* 4456 509990 304* 15321 428881 83* 3382 171835 2009 49* 1412 170233 127 4210 463601 307* 14896 397919 83* 3192 162332 2010 49 1504 178654 127* 4406 468417 309* 15273 433199 83 3322 173619 2011 50* 1559 187747 127 4386 475051 311* 15517 440632 82* 3442 175606 2012 50* 1595 203836 127 4463 490271 313* 15878 473489 82* 3454 183048 2013 50* 1641 223527 127 4535 473141 316* 16230 501162 82* 3458 184493 2014 50* 1695 230553 127 4530 465971 319 16618 509521 82 3514 179506 Year China Russia Romania The total gross domestic Population, millions Total GDP Numbe r of patents Population, millions Total GDP Numbe r of patents Population, millions Total GDP 2000 1270 4644 26445 146 1931 24093 22 2001 1280 5029 31232 145 2029 25657 22 Number of patents 223 1028 236 1147 product (GDP) was expressed in billions of dollars. Sources for gross domestic product, number of patents and population: 2002 1290 5486 41418 145 2125 24499 21 248 1494 http://www.wipo.int/ipstat 2003 1300 6036 58757 144 2280 25644 21 2004 1310 6644 69017 144 2444 25040 21 2005 1315 7399 97948 143 2600 25948 21 2006 1320 8338 129290 143 2812 30575 21 261 285 297 323 902 987 978 903 s/en/statistics/country_pr ofile/, www.populstat.info/, www.statista.com/statistic s/ 263765/total2007 1330 9521 161308 142 3052 30489 21 343 965 population-of-china/, 2008 1335 10437 204268 142 3212 31095 21 2009 1345 11401 241434 142 2961 28859 21 2010 1340 12613 308326 142 3094 32837 21 2011 1347 13810 436170 142 3226 31464 21 2012 1354 14880 561408 143 3336 34379 20 370 345 341 349 351 1123 1150 1501 1599 1244 accessed in January 2016. For the years in which information was not found in accessible documents, the population was supposed 2013 1360 16023 734096 143 3381 34067 19 363 1241 as a consequence of a 2014 1367 17201 837817 146 3402 28512 19 369 1252 normal evolution (*). 215 Picture 1: Evolution of gross domestic product per capita over the period 2000-2014 In order to highlight the significance of the creativity stimulation for promoting innovation, a succinct analysis could be developed for several states. The analysis took into consideration the number of patents and the gross domestic product per capita for the following states: Republic of Korea, as one of the states characterized by an intense economic development in the last decades, Japan – as a state in which adequate ways were found in order to stimulate the activity of patenting and where remarkable results in patenting activities were obtained, United States of America as the most important economic power in the world, Germany – as a state known for the significance given to development of technics and industry, China – as a state found in an intense industrial development and having the highest number of inhabitants, Russia – as a state where there was an intense promotion of methods able to stimulate the technical creativity and Romania, as a country of some of the paper authors. In all the mentioned countries, a special attention is given to the development of technical higher education. For example, if the percentage of the tertiary education graduates in natural sciences and engineering is considered, one could notice that in 2012, this indicator had the value of 32 % in Republic of Korea (ranks first in the world), 31 % in Germany (ranks second), 23 % in Japan (ranks 12th), 16 % in U.S.A. (ranks 32) etc. (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_graduates_in_natural _sciences_ and_engineering). If the countries are analyzed from the point of view of the 25-to 34-year-olds having a tertiary education degree, one can remark that, in this list, Republic of Korea ranks first (63.82 %), Japan ranks second (58.70%), Russia ranks fourth (56.46%), Germany ranked 28th (27.67 %) etc. (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_25-_to_34-year olds_having_a_tertiary _education_ degree). The evolution of the gross domestic product and of the number of patents recorded by the national authorities as they are mentioned in the accessible documents are presented in tables 1 and 2; the period 2000-2014 was selected as a period characteristic for the new century and millennium and for which statistic information could exist. In order to evaluate the significance of increasing the gross domestic product and also the interest directed to increase of number of patents, one considered that a better information could be given by the gross domestic product per capita and by the number Np of patents recorded for a million of inhabitants. As a consequence, on the base of information presented in table 1, the above mentioned indicators (gross domestic product per capita and number Np of patents for a million of inhabitants) were calculated and, as a result of these calculations, the diagrams from pictures 1 and 2 were elaborated. The graphical representation from picture 1 corresponds to the evolution of the gross domestic product per capita over the period 2000-2014. For almost all considered states, an approximately continuous low increase of the gross domestic product per capita could be observed. A certain decrease of the gross domestic product per capita appeared in the period of economic crisis started in 2008. The last statement is valid for all the considered states, with two exceptions, 216 corresponding to Republic of Korea and China, which were not significantly affected by the economic crisis and which had practically a continuous ascendant development. The second indicator able to offer an image concerning the stimulation of the technical creativity was the number of patents Np recorded for a million inhabitants. The analysis of the graphical representation from picture 2 shows also a certain increase of the indicator Np for all the considered states. The increase is more intense also for the two states mentioned in the previous paragraph and namely for China and Republic of Korea. If some decades ago the Chinese industry was considered as essentially involved in reproduction of the industrial objects, in the last years a real remarkable attention was paid to the activities of patenting. If in 2000 only 26445 technical solutions were patented, in 2014 the number of patents was of 837817 and this represents a remarkable increase of more than 30 times. One could also notice that if the number of patents for one million inhabitants is taken into consideration, from 2011 the Republic of Korea exceeds the performance of Japan, previously known as a good promoter of the patenting activities. The analysis of the information included in pictures 1 and 2 shows that there is a certain correspondence between the increase of the intensity of patenting activities and the increase of gross domestic product per capita, respectively. Among the considered countries, Republic of Korea and China known the most intense increase from the point of view both of gross domestic product per capita and of the number of patents Np per million inhabitants. These countries are known also for the appreciable attention directed to the higher technical education and the above mentioned results (increase of gross domestic product per capita and of number of patents per million inhabitants) could be connected with the significance directed by the states to the technical higher education and to the stimulation of technical creativity. 3. WAYS OF STIMULATING THE STUDENTS TECHNICAL CREATIVITY There are many ways in which the technical creativity could be stimulated within the technical higher education, in a certain correspondence with the variety of formal or informal university activities. Thus, the analysis could be started by discussing the possibilities offered by the university lectures to contribute to the technical creativity stimulation. Within their lectures, the professors could highlight the main technical problems for which adequate solutions were not found. The professor could also show to the students that the information presented within lectures corresponds to a certain stage of science and technics and that there is a possibility that just during their activity in the field of technics, this information could be affected by significant changes. In these changes, the students themselves could be involved and they also could contribute to them. One of the current requirements valid in the case of lectures is the promotion of an active attitude, this meaning that the students could formulate questions just during the lectures and this could be an interesting way of encouraging and promoting the technical creativity. Picture 2: Evolution of patents number per million inhabitants over the period 2000-2014 217 During seminars activity, the information concerning unsolved technical problems could be also highlighted and one must notice that more time (in comparison with the time dedicated to lectures) could be given to discussing technical problems and ways of their solving. The applicative activities such as laboratory work could also contribute to stimulation of technical creativity. It is well known sometimes the critical spirit of the student or generally speaking of the young age; the students are tented to observe the possible deficiencies or possibilities to improve the laboratory equipment or processes. One can appreciate that the didactic staff could contribute and orient with tact such normal critical trends for solving proper technical problems in an original way. The design and development of semester or yearly or diploma projects could be also used in order to force the development and the use of the student technical creativity. Generally, the students could know that original solutions of problems formulated as project topics could be better appreciated by the diploma boards and even by technical practice. A direct involvement of student in solving practical problems could correspond to periods of technological practices/ interships, when the future engineers could be oriented not only to the accumulation of practical knowledge or competences, but they could be encouraged to find new or improved solutions for technical problems. In certain universities, there are activities in which students must solve scientific problems or technical problems involving a high scientific component, but considered as accessible for their training level. Usually, the students are guided in improving their scientific abilities by the teachers or just by a student having a higher scientific level (master student or PhD student). This could be also a circumstance when the student could be oriented to find original or improved solutions for the problems to whom he must cope. It is clear that during the activities of elaboration of master dissertation or PhD thesis in technical fields there are significant possibilities to develop and efficiently use the technical creativity. If the above mentioned activities are placed where the technical creativity could be directly encouraged and applied, one could also mention that over the years the researchers searched and found an impressive number of methods able to be applied in order to facilitate finding of new or improved technical solutions. In the web page https://www.mycoted.com/Category:Creativity_ Techniques, near 200 methods of stimulating technical creativity or the creativity in general are mentioned. Such techniques could be certainly applied in various university activities in order to stimulate and use the students’ technical creativity. The researchers considered that the high level of patenting activities developed in Japan is the result of knowing and applying adequate methods and techniques for creativity stimulation. For this reason, initially there was considered as a certain surprise the statement formulated by the researcher Tan al Girl (1997). This researcher considered that, in the case of Japan, more valid is the opinion expressed by American psychologist of Hungarian origin Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, who was saying that the insurance of a background able to stimulate the creative thinking is more important than the promotion of activities oriented to knowing and learning creative techniques. 4. EXPERIENCE ACCUMULATED IN SEVERAL UNIVERSITIES OF ROMANIAN LANGUAGE ABOUT THE STIMULATION OF STUDENTS CREATIVITY In the “Gheorghe Asachi” Technical University of Iaşi – Romania, several decades ago, professor Vitalie Belous was the first university professor who formulated the problem of finding methods able to stimulate technical creativity, both in case of students and of the engineers working in enterprises. Initially, in the ’60 years of the previous century, he founded a real extracurricular school of inventics and conferences and symposiums were organized, in order to discuss problems in connection with the activity of generating and patenting technical solutions. Within these schools of inventics, the professor Belous organized courses dedicated to the engineers from enterprises. Afterwards, as a consequence of his initiative, optional courses aiming to stimulate and develop the students’ creativity were included in the curricula of study programs existing in the former Faculty of Mechanics. Professor Vitalie Belous organized also conferences and symposiums 218 where problems specific to the so called inventics were analyzed and various methods able to facilitate the promotion of the technical creativity were analyzed, in order to be applied by students and engineers. Nowadays, a university subject called “Fundamentals of technical creativity” is included in the curricula of several study programs. Essentially, the lectures corresponding to this university subject present to the students distinct methods applicable in order to stimulate the technical creativity. An important chapter of the lectures is dedicated to factors able to stimulate or to act as obstacles in the activities aiming to promote the use of the technical creativity. We consider that in this way, the student/ the future engineer could have more information concerning the difficulties possible to be met in his activities of introducing new or improved technical solutions. As a direct result of the activities initially promoted by professor Vitalie Belous and also developed by his collaborators, one can mention that there were periods when 5-10 % from the Romanian patents were proposed by students and professors from the “Gheorghe Asachi” Technical University of Iaşi. Yearly, the students and professors from the university of Iaşi were sending to the Romanian State Office of Patents and Trades about 150-200 patents applications. In picture 3, one can see several patents whose first authors or single authors were, in that time, students of the “Gheorghe Asachi” Technical University of Iaşi. Also as a consequence of the activities promoted initially by professor Vitalie Belous, in 1992 in Iaşi was founded the National Institute of Inventics, designed as a significant research institute and promoter of the inventics in Romania. Yearly this institute organizes a saloon of inventions and a conference in which problems specific to the promotion of the technical creativity are debated. Professor Belous initiated also the publishing of handbooks valid for the field of inventics (Belous, 1986; Belous, 1990; Belous and Plahteanu, 2014 etc.); such handbooks were also elaborated by other professors involved in activities of students’ creativity stimulation (Nagîţ, 2001; Slătineanu and Duşa, 2002; Slătineanu, 2015 etc.). In order to highlight the significance of training the future engineer for generation of new or improved technical solutions, professor Belous was saying that the engineer must have four important functions / responsibilities: the engineer must know technics, must apply technics, must lead groups of specialists in technics and must generate new technics (must generate new or improved technical equipment and processes) (Seghedin, 2010). In order to involve the master students in the field of generation and protection of the original technical solutions, for some master studies programs, a subject concerning the industrial property was included in the curricula. At “Ştefan cel Mare” University of Suceava – Romania, the main promoter of activities aiming the stimulation of the students technical creativity was professor Dorel Cernomazu (1947-2015), one of the most important Romanian inventors; over the years, professor D. Cernomazu and his collaborators patented more than 300 technical solutions. Within the Faculty of Electrotechnics, professor Cernomazu succeeded to really promote the technical creativity, so that in the last years, “Ştefan cel Mare“ University of Suceava was situating on the first place in Romania, if the number of patents applications is considered. For example, in 2011, the students and the professors from this university recorded 88 patent applications, while the number of patents applications was of 32 for the “Gheorghe Asachi” Technical University of Iaşi, and 34 for the Politehnica University of Bucharest etc. Picture 3: Patents for which the first author or the single author was a student: a – device for measuring the cutting energy (Ciulică M. et al., patent Romania no. 65424/1975; b – device for sharpening the tools for head used in order to machine conical gears in arc of circle (Cioban G. et al., patent Romania no. 71440/1978); c – chuck with elastic sleeve (Colceriu E., patent Romania, no. 86708/1983; d – transformable shoes (Ilade C., patent Romania no. 110293/1994); e – device for study the machinability by cutting under constant force feed (Gherman, L. et al., patent Romania no. 128618/2011) 219 An intense promotion of the activities aiming to stimulate the students’ technical creativity was developed in the Technical University of Moldova of Chişinău (Republic of Moldova). Professors Ion Bostan and Valeriu Dulgheru encouraged the students and professors in patenting their original technical solutions. They elaborated also handbooks to be used in various activities able to stimulate the technical creativity and to ensure the legal protection of objects of industrial property. A university subject called “Technical creativity” was included in the curricula for all the study programs valid for the students of the Faculty of Mechanical, Industrial and Transport Engineering. During the activities corresponding to this university subject, the students learn how they could use various methods able to stimulate the technical creativity (brainstorming, sinectics, value analysis, TRIZ etc.). 5. CONCLUSIONS The specialty literature highlights the significance given by researchers in finding and applying adequate techniques and methods able to stimulate the technical creativity in the university environment. The number of papers and books in which the problems of efficient use of technical creativity increased constantly over the last years. One can notice that there is a certain correspondence between the patenting activities and the increase of the gross domestic product per capita. The analysis of statistical information proved that in the cases of Republic of Korea and China (two states with distinct levels of development, but found in a real and continuous economic and technical progress in the last years), in the period 2000-2014, the effect of the economic crisis were less evident; more than this, over the above mentioned period, the gross domestic product per capita and the number of patents reported to a million inhabitants were recorded a real continuous increase. One can also observe that in the addressed cases, the increase of the gross domestic product and of the number of patents could be correlated with the significance given to the training students in order to efficiently use their technical abilities and creativity. The preoccupations of the universities to find and apply adequate methods able to educate the future technical specialists for an efficient use of their creativity led to the introduction of university subjects 220 dedicated to a better delivering of the technical creativity and methods and techniques applicable in this view were studied and used. The experience accumulated in some universities of Romanian language showed that the researches and real applications of methods able to stimulate the technical creativity are especially the results of the activities developed by some professors with remarkable activities in this field, but gradually the university leaders were involved in the activities aiming the stimulation and efficient use of technical creativity by the students and professors. REFERENCE LIST 1. Badran, I. (2007). Enhancing creativity and innovation in engineering education. European Journal of Engineering Education, 32(5), 573–585. 2. Belous, V. (1986). Technical creativity in machine building. Inventics (in Romanian). Iaşi, Romania; Publishing House Junimea. 3. Belous, V. (1990). Inventor’s handbook (in Romanian). Bucharest, Romania; Technical Publishing House. 4. Belous, V., Plahteanu, B. (2014). Fundamentals of technical creativity. Iaşi, Romania; Performantica. 5. Cantemir, L., Dulgheru, V., Carcea, M. (2000). The practical inventics (in Romanian). Chişinău, Republic of Moldova; Publishing House AGEPI. 6. Căpâlneanu, I. (1978). Intelligence and creativity (in Romanian) (pp. 105). Bucharest, Romania: Military Publishing House. 7. Gaspar, D., Mabic, M. (2015). Creativity in higher education. Universal Journal of Educational Research 3(9), 598-605. 8. Girl, al T. (1997). What we can learn from a century of cultivating creative thinking in Japan? Teaching and Learning, 18(1), 9-18. 9. Livingston, L. (2010). Teaching Creativity in Higher Education. Arts Education Policy Review, 111(2), 59–62. 10. Nagîţ, G. (2001). Techniques and methods for the creativity stimulation (in Romanian). Chişinău, Republic of Moldova; Publishing House Tehnica-Info. 11. Nisula, A.-M., Kallio, A., Oikarinen, T., Kianto, A. (2015). Fostering team creativity and innovativeness with playfulness: a multi-case study. International Journal of Innovation and Learning, 17(1), 79-97. 12. Seghedin N. (2010). The Professor Belous (in Romanian). In B. Plahteanu (Ed.), The founder of the school of inventics at 80 years; today is the magister's day (pp.47-49). Iaşi, Romania: Performantica. 13. Silva Alves, A.D., Gonçalves Quelhas, O.L., Teixeira da Silva, M.H., Jesus Lameira, V. (2015). On the role of university in the promotion of innovation: exploratory evidences from a university-industry cooperation experience in Brazil. International Journal of Innovation and Learning, 17(1), 1-18. 14. Slătineanu, L. (2015). Industrial property (in Romanian). Iaşi, Romania; Performantica. 15. Slătineanu, L., Duşa, P. (2002). Management of technological innovation (in Romanian). Iaşi, Romania; Tehnopress. 221
﻿Cape Town, South Africa June 9-11, 2008 The Role of Higher Education in High tech Industry Development: What Can International Experience Tell Us? Sachi Hatakenaka Independent Researcher The role of higher education in high tech industry development: what can international experience tell us? Sachi Hatakenaka Independent researcher Paper for presentation at the ABCDE conference June 2008 Introduction There is an extraordinary level of policy attention being given to higher education today. The reason is clear; with the rise of knowledge economies and science-based high tech industries, higher education is considered key to economic development. At the same time, the world has observed that high tech industry can emerge in a diverse set of countries including those with limited industrial bases or low levels of economic development, such as Ireland, China or India. It is not surprising that innovation policies to create and support high tech industries are a priority in almost all OECD and many developing countries. Developing an appropriate higher education sector is becoming a critical component of such policies. There is much written on the role of American universities in high tech industries and more generally in their industrial development, including some that compare their roles against those in Europe or Japan. For other countries, there are studies which conclude that a significant role was or is being played by well trained engineers and scientists, and by implication higher education systems. However, few studies go beyond referring to higher education as one of multiple – albeit often citical – factors. There is also a whole body of comparative higher education literature, but they describe similarities and differences across systems without comparing the roles they play in economic development. Lester (2005) makes an important step in arguing that different types of industrial transformations require different roles to be played by universities based on a comparative study of several countries. There is also an emerging literature on university-industry relationships in developing countries. However, there has been little written on how different roles may be played by different higher education institutions across countries, and how these may be related to different institutional characteristics. This is a particularly striking gap in our knowledge given the fact that high tech industry is not monolithic across countries; different capabilities are being developed in high tech industries and different levels of ‘high tech’ content is evident in different locations. The objective of this paper is to begin to fill such gaps by addressing the following two questions: 1. what is the role higher education can play in the development of high tech industry? 2. what are the key characteristics of higher education institutions and systems that are important in playing such roles? The ultimate objective of the paper is to draw lessons for the future for developing higher education systems, particularly in developing countries. 2 The paper seeks to consolidate evidence about the role of higher education in the development of high tech industry in a range of countries. Wherever possible, this has been complemented by country specific literature on higher education systems and their development. The main emphasis has been given to two ‘recent’ high tech industrial sectors: ICT (including hardware as well as software) and biotechnology. Although different countries exhibit different paths in developing high tech industries, the point of this paper is not to provide a full contrast of these paths taken, nor to examine all the contributing factors for high tech industry development. That high tech industry took off for a variety of reasons is taken as a given, and the paper focuses on what possible specific roles higher education could have played within that context. The paper gives some weight in examining differences in high tech industry capabilities among countries – but only to the extent that they may be related to different roles played by higher education systems. In order to explore the variety of roles played by higher education at different stages of industrial development, four sets of countries were included in the paper: (a) the US, which has held a leading position in both industries from their birth; (b) Japan and Finland, which entered the global competition in high tech products relatively early, but based on significant industrial capability that already existed; (c) a group of late-developers including Taiwan and Korea which nonetheless were building industrial capabilities around the time when these industries were born; and (d) a group of countries which developed high tech industry from a much less developed industrial base (Ireland, Israel, China and India). The paper attempts to draw on comparative historical data to the extent they exist, so that the comparisons can be made not only across countries but also across time. Roles of Universities in the Development of High Tech Industry What are the roles universities played in different national and industrial settings? This section gives a brief summary of country cases, presented in chronological order in terms of when (roughly) these countries “took off” as new centres for high tech industries. Several cases, such as Korea and Taiwan, are presented together, mainly because their timing of entry into high tech arena was similar, but also because they have key contrasting points in terms of the roles played by higher education. US. The birth and development of biotechnology and ICT industry in the US was one of the key reasons why policy makers around the world took note of the importance of universities. While there were many myths in the early days, the literature today gives a consistent portrait of where and how universities contributed. It is well documented that some American universities played a particularly visible role in the birth and the early development of biotechnology industry. Fundamental scientific discoveries in university laboratories and resulting patents (such as Cohen and Boyer’s discovery of the 3 recombinant DNA technique) led to the development of a whole new industry with strong linkages with academic scientific research (Henderson, Orsenigo and Pisano 1999). The early evolution of the industry was characterized by a number of new firms, many of which were academic spinoffs – usually with academics working in conjunction with professional managers, backed by venture capital. The early academic inventors were labelled as ‘star scientists’ as they were key players both in basic science and in their applications and had a special role mainly because of the significant amount of tacit knowledge associated with the original scientific discoveries (Zucker and others 1996, Zucker and others 1998, Zucker and Darby 2002). The norms in American universities which permitted academics to get deeply engaged in commercialization played a key role in this process (Henderson, Orsenigo and Pisano 1999). American universities also played key roles in the development of the computer hardware and software industry, though their visibility varied over time (Bresnahan and Malerba 1999, Mowery 1999, Rosenberg and Nelson 1994). For instance, universities were actively engaged in the early development of computers in the 1940s (and indeed during this period, European universities such as Manchester, Cambridge and Berlin were as active as American universities). They also played a critical role in the development of microcomputers as exemplified by spinoffs from MIT, Stanford and University of Texas (only Cambridge University in the UK played a similar role in Europe). The development of the software industry was facilitated by an early establishment of computer science as a new discipline (Mowery 1999). This helped not only in universities’ contribution to key knowledge formation but also in organizing and delivering education programmes to supply updated skills. Indeed, the American universities’ ability to create and legitimate computer science as a new field was unparalleled by European or Japanese universities (Mowery 1999). This ‘responsiveness’ of American universities is not new; they have been responsive consistently over a period of time, for instance in the emergence of electrical, chemical and aeronautical engineering (Rosenberg and Nelson 1994). It is also not an accident that a group of responsive institutions emerged in the US. A whole group of American universities, called land grant colleges, were founded with an explicit mission to serve the practical needs of the community in the late 19th century, and the government specifically funded some of their service activities such as agricultural extension. Similarly, the government research funding in the post-war period was huge but also ‘mission-oriented,’ coming from key agencies with application interests such as defence, health and energy (Rosenberg and Nelson 1994, Geiger 2004b). The role played by the Defence Advanced Research Project Agency (DARPA) is funding application oriented basic research was legendary; so much so that the American National Academy of Science recommended a creation of ‘DARPA-like’ agency in energy to the government for ensuring continued competitiveness of American science (National Academy of Science 2005). Japan. Japanese experience of developing ICT and biotechnology was one of catching up. In the case of ICT, this was achieved through established electrical equipment and electronics companies entering the market in the 1960s (Bresnahan and Malerba 1999). One important 4 role Japanese universities played was in supplying engineers and scientists to these companies, particularly with a massive expansion of undergraduate programmes, orchestrated by the government in the late 50s (Nakayama 1991). However, this seems to be the only visible role universities played in the development of high tech industry. Indeed, the popular perception has been that Japan developed in spite of its weaknesses in higher education (Goodman 2005). Large Japanese companies developed a practice of lifetime employment, hiring candidates with best potential with a view to training in-house (Dore and Sako 1989). While these companies did recruit large numbers of engineers and scientists, they were less concerned about their academic performance or specialization so long as they came from reputable universities known to be highly selective at entrance (Nakayama 1991). It appears that Japanese universities did not develop in a manner that permitted them to play proactive roles with respect to industry. Universities were recovering from war-related disruptions while industry was actively acquiring foreign technology and played minimal roles in such a process in the 1950s (Hashimoto 1999). Industrialists are quoted to have boasted that they no longer needed to depend on universities when they started to establish their own corporate laboratories in the 1960s (Nakayama 1991). In the late 1960s the relationship between universities and industry received an additional blow; student uprising led to further criticisms about university-industry relationships, and a strong mood to censor such relationships began to prevail (Hashimoto 1999, Hatakenaka 2004). Various rules and norms emerged in this culture of censorship; the bulk of scientists and engineers were civil servants in national universities, which effectively forbade them from consulting with industry, and universities did not have the autonomy to create their own rules about their engagement (Hatakenaka 2004). However, it does not mean that Japanese academics were not good enough in their science to collaborate with industry. Japanese scientific performance was the equivalent of other industrialized nations by the early 1990s (Hicks 1993). It is also untrue to assume that they had no linkages with industry. One unusual mechanism that brought university academics and industry together was the industry practice of sending their own staff to universities, some times for a whole year, which was often motivated by their desire to learn about some fields of science, in which industry had limited expertise (Hicks 1993, Darby and Zucker 1996). Accordingly, in biotechnology, ‘star scientists’ are found to be actively working with company employees in their university labs – with higher levels of co-authorships than in the US. Other researchers also find that Japanese academics have an equivalent level of relationships with companies as in the US or UK, at least as measured by co-authorships, but that much depended on the ability of companies to be proactive in drawing scientific and technological information from them (Kodama and Suzuki 2007). In biotechnology, new firms played a negligible role in Japan, in a striking contrast to the US and UK where academic spinoffs were dominant (Henderson and others 1999). This was partly reflective of relative weaknesses of Japanese science; there were literally no researchers in Japan working in genetic engineering at the time of the scientific breakthroughs (Darby and Zucker 1996). But even when they did catch up in science, universities as organizations did 5 not permit their civil servant ‘star scientists’ to work in the same way in new companies (Darby and Zucker 1996). This is consistent with the fact that Japanese universities were generally slow to respond to emerging industrial skills need, for instance in new areas such as software related engineering, semiconductors and biotechnology (Baba et al 1996, Mowery 1999, Kobayashi 2001, Darby and Zucker 1996). Curricular change was found to be infrequent and limited in scope in Japan compared with the US, where updating took place organically and almost constantly (Hoshino et al 2003). They were also slow in establishing relevant research training. Although masters programmes in engineering became commonplace by the 80s, PhD programmes in science and engineering remained small and unattractive for industry (Clark 1995, Shimizu and Mori 2001 also see Table 1 for size). PhDs from universities were too narrow and too academically oriented for industry. Thus, industry recruited bright potential researchers and trained them inhouse – using the uniquely Japanese system in which doctorates were awarded by universities to dissertations which were written solely in the companies, unsupervised by academics (Shimizu and Mori 2001). The companies took the extreme route of developing an in-house training for cultivating PhD level researchers. [insert table 1] Korea and Taiwan. If Japan demonstrated that a miracle can take place, Korea and Taiwan proved that it was no accident. However, the roles their higher education played in their high tech industry development were different from that of Japan; subtly in the case of Korea, and dynamically in the case of Taiwan. At the surface level, Korea’s development experience looks similar to that of Japan, in importing key technologies, developing industrial giants, most notably in electronics, which in turn made the transition to high tech industry. A well balanced education system has played a critical role in this process along with the early emphasis in engineering education; however little reference is made to the role of higher education in the transition Korean electronics companies made during the 1980s to high tech fields such as computers and semiconductors (Kim 1993). One reason for the lack of visible participation by universities had to do with inadequately developed research capacity in universities arising from underinvestment by the government (Kim 2000). Korean higher education went through massive expansion in enrolments in the 1970s and the 1980s (see Table 2), with the key consequence of rising student staff ratios whiwh was 23% in 1966 but 36% in 1985 (Kim 1993). In 1985, nearly a half of national and public universities revenues came from tuition and fees (KCUE 1990). The lack of public resources is still evident in Korea’s higher education. As Tables 3 and 4 show, Korea’s public spending is at a strikingly low level in per student terms, compared with that of other countries. Research orientation was also slow to develop, partly because of the historical division of labour in which public research institutions were responsible for research (Sohn and Kenny 2007). It is not surprising that universities continued to be teaching dominated and could not play effective research related roles, and that academic spinoffs have been largely absent in Korea (Sohn and Kenny 2007). 6 [Table 2-4] At the same time, competition for entry for reputable universities intensified, resulting in proliferation of similar programmes, as all universities aspired to be like Soul National University (Kim and Nam 2007). The emerging hierarchy of higher education institutions, based on their selectivity at university entrance, however, did serve industry. Large high tech companies such as Samsung could recruit directly from the best universities (Kim and Nam 2007). It is not that no action was taken. The government began to invest in research and graduate education in the 1980s. The insufficiently developed university-industry relationships were also recognized as a problem and the government invested in special programmes to strengthen such ties in the late 1980s (Kim 1993) leading to some measurable increases in their relationships (Kim 2000). However, it was not until the BK21 programme in 1999, which for the first time concentrated large amounts of resources in the best institutions for research and graduate education, that the impact was felt (Kim and Nam 2007). However, some of the quoted statistics indicate a high, rather than low, level of engagement with industry. About a half of university research had been funded by industry in the early 1990s (Kim 2000), and one survey of industry found that nearly a half of surveyed companies had worked with universities (Sohn and Kenny 2007). The industry share of research funding declined in the late 1990s to about 15%, presumably reflecting increasing levels of government funding in research (see Table 5). However, it remains higher than the 6% in OECD countries, indicating that industry engagement continues to be important for universities, even if such relationships lead to little visible contribution. [Table 5] The 1980s were also the critical period in which Taiwan’s high tech industry in computers and semiconductors emerged. Taiwan’s higher education system and its development shares with Japan and Korea both the selectivity of universities and emphasis in engineering and sciences, but the sector remained small for a little longer than in Korea (Cheng 1992 – also see Table 2). Also, Taiwan’s experience is markedly different in the role played by a public research institution called Electronic Research Service Organization (ERSO), a branch of Industrial Technology Research Institute (ITRI). ERSO orchestrated the first major technology transfer agreement with RCA in the 1970s, and subsequently developed a IC fabrication technology to establish a spinoff company, which in turn played a critical role in the diffusion of technological know (Wade 1990, Saxenian 2004). Since the Taiwanese industry comprised many small to medium scale enterprises (unlike Japan or Korea), they did not have the capability to undertake significant R&D in-house, and public investment in applied research was essential for their technological upgrading (Wade 1990). The most striking difference in Taiwan’s high tech development is the role played by their diaspora of engineers, particularly in Silicon Valley, and how ‘brain drain’ turned into ‘brain circulation’ (Saxenian 1999, 2002, 2004, 2006). Almost eighty percent of the Taiwanese 7 diaspora professionals in Silicon Valley had gone to the US to study and remained there for work (Saxenian 2002). Early generations of the diaspora were instrumental in informing the Taiwanese government about Silicon Valley and its unusual dynamism, the reason why Taiwanese had an early policy for building a cluster rather like Silicon Valley (Saxenian 2004). In 1980, they invested in a science park in Hsinchu, close to two of Taiwan’s best technical universities, and relocated ERSO (Saxenian 2004). The science park became an active recipient of the returning diaspora with 40% of companies started by them. (Wade 1990, Saxenian 2004). If it was ERSO, the public research institute, which played a critical role in applied research, what role did higher education play in Taiwan? The first and foremost role appears to be the supply of well trained engineers. Engineering was a popular subject, as the labour market rewarded engineers well (Wade 1990). Scientists and engineers accounted for more than a third of graduates during the 1960s, more than 40% in the 1970s and 50% by 1980 (Wade 1990). Though the size of the sector remained relatively small until the mid-1980s (about 14%), this was already a significant concentration of engineers. It is well known that Taiwan suffered from a massive brain drain which started from the 1950s until the 1990s. Interestingly, this did not stop the government in having organized programmes of overseas study to complement Taiwan’s own education system. In 1975, there were 2300 students studying under government auspices; in 1986 7000 were in such a programme (Wade 1990). This is to be contrasted to the size of the brain drain, which was as large as 20% of the engineering graduates in Taiwan in the late 1970s (Hou and Gee 1993). Instead of stopping to send people, Taiwanese government simply stepped up efforts to keep in touch with the diaspora community (Wade 1990), the benefit of which was finally felt in the 1990s when the brains started to return. Even in brain drain, selectivity appears to have played a role. Having a competitive system of higher education entrance meant that some engineering colleges and universities had an elite status – and it was largely graduates from such institutions who became critical members of the diaspora and formed vibrant alumni networks (Saxenian 2004). Such networks were important for solving technical problem, as former teachers as well as former classmates represented important sources of technical information. Israel, Finland, and Ireland. These three small countries provide an interesting contrast as they share the experience of having their ICT industry take off in the 1990s, with very different configurations and capabilities (Roper and Grimes 2005). This section will discuss how such differences in industrial capabilities reflect, at least in part, the shape and nature of their higher education and public research systems. Israel started by attracting multinational R&D as early as the late 1960s and gradually developed a vibrant and R&D-oriented ICT sector dominated by export oriented domestic companies (de Fontenay and Carmel 2004). Finland emerged out of a serious economic downturn in the early 1990s and managed to develop a globally competitive telecom industry centred around Nokia (Dahlman, Roper and Grimes 2005). Ireland turned around from being a recession ridden poor country in Europe to become a dynamic centre for ICT industry, led 8 principally by an inflow of multinational companies (Sand 2005, Arora et al 2004, Roper and Grimes 2005). The biggest contrast among the three countries is in their R&D capabilities (Roper and Grimes 2005). Whereas Israeli industry contains significant R&D activities, leading to small scale production of niche-products, Finland covers a whole range of value chain from R&D to mass production, and Irish ICT industry is characterized by mass production of products which are developed elsewhere, with only a small product oriented domestic software sector emerging. In Israel, universities played two roles, in supplying highly skilled human resources and in being a source of leading technologies not only in ICT but also in biotechnology and agriculture related research (de Fontenay and Carmel 2004, Breznitz 2007). The Israeli government had made significant public investments in application oriented scientific research in universities, public research institutions and in the military soon after its formation. Their universities were well established scientific centres from the early days; a high number of publications per unit population characterizes Israeli academia (see Table 6). They have also long been application-oriented as their patenting records demonstrate (Trajtenberg 2001). It is not surprising that Israel became one of the first R&D sites abroad for US multinational companies. Universities’ contribution tends to be overshadowed by that of the Military in the stories told about Israel’s high tech industry, but they have contributed to the emergence of an entrepreneurial sector directly and indirectly, through spinoffs as well as science parks some of which had been established as early as the 1960s (Roper and Grime 2005). [Table 6] The military played an interesting role both as a source of new technologies which could lead to civil applications, but also as a key selector and shaper of future scientists. Through the three year compulsory military service, high calibre young people were identified early and trained intensively in their science and engineering programmes, before they went on to universities (de Fontenay and Carmel 2004). In the late 1990s, ‘graduates’ from the military were starting up even without going on to universities (Breznitz 2007) Israel’s already rich human resource received a further boost, when a total of a million immigrants from the former Soviet Union flooded the country in the early 1990s. Many had science and engineering backgrounds, and played a key role in boosting the technical human resource base of the country on the eve of the ICT take-off (de Fontenay and Carmel 2004). In Finland, the government implemented an information society strategy to grow out of the deep economic recession in the early 1990s. The idea was to restructure the economy into a knowledge-based one through public investments in R&D, along with education reforms (OECD 2003). There had been significant concerns that universities were detached from industry, and were unable to meet changing labour market needs (OECD 2003). Significant public investments were subsequently made in R&D emphasizing collaboration between between companies and universities, and the government took a decisive move in creating a polytechnic sector as part of the (Srinivas and Viljamaa 2008, Dahlman and others 2007, OECD 2003). These two actions are consistent with the fact that a large telecommunication 9 sector emerged, active both in high quality R&D but also in mass production which requires significant skills in the labour force at the mid level. However, universities’ inclination to work with industry appears to have been quite variable across institutions. Some universities with technological orientation or regional development missions appear to have been much more active in working with industry, with much larger shares of funding from Finnish Funding Agency for Technology and Innovation (TEKES), which provide competitive grants for application oriented research (Ministry of Education, Finland 2005). In Oulu, which was a region that transformed itself from being a sleepy backwater to becoming a vibrant high tech centre, its university played an important role (Donnelly and Hyry 2004). Established in the 1950s with a specific mission to help the region develop, the University of Oulu has been both proactive and responsive in its education. Electrical engineering department was established early, well before industrial needs emerged, but they also responded quickly to meet emerging skills shortages, for instance in management education (Donnelly and Hyry 2004). The university’s responsiveness also led to developments of relevant research centres, in which both basic and applied research were undertaken, often jointly with industry – and there appear to be some cases of academic spinoffs, though the degree of their success is not well documented. Finland also made a decisive move in creating a set of responsive institutions when they established 29 polytechnics in the 1990s. By 2000, nearly 60% of entrants to higher education were going to polytechnics. Though it is early to understand the full impact of polytechnics in Finland, their performance reviews have been generally positive, with indications that their expansion coincided with the timing of major industrial needs, particularly in telecommunications (OECD 2003). In one survey of high tech industry in Northern Finland, 47% of companies said that polytechnics were important, compared with 38% which thought the University of Oulu to be important, and 10-20% that found other universities in Finland important (Juahiainen 2006). In Ireland, the government led expansion of technically trained manpower in the 1970s and 1980s played a key role in attracting MNCs including in ICT. The starting point was the consensus that emerged early among policy makers that technical education was critically needed, but that universities were overly academic, and that different institutions were needed to provide the critically needed technical manpower (White 2001). Thirteen Regional Technical Colleges and two National Institutes of Higher Education were established in the 1970s for this purpose, representing the bulk of expansion in the tertiary sector. They were established specifically to be responsive to economic needs, and are today known to have wellestablished practices, for instance, in assessing industrial needs or in obtaining industrial inputs in curricular content (Breznitz 2007). Starting from the late 1970s, the Industrial Development Authority (IDA) also began to have direct influence in the major expansion of engineering and science education, not only in RTCs and NIHEs but also in universities (White 2001, Sands 2005, Breznitz 2007). Between 1978 and 1983, engineering graduates increased by 40% and computer science graduates doubled in 10 number (White 2001). This ‘early’ investment in technical skills was a key factor in attracting MNCs particularly in software industry as the skills shortages became pronounced elsewhere in the 1990s (Arora and others 2004, Sands, Breznitz). Interestingly, though research capacity was slow to develop in universities, owing to lack of policy emphasis on research until the late 1990s, universities also played an important role in developing the indigenous software industry through academic spinoffs (Sands 2005). There was in fact, an early development of computer science departments in two leading institutions through what now appears to be a historical accident (Breznitz 2007). The government had announced a plan to disband the faculty of engineering in one university and to move it to the other university. Both institutions took defiant steps to establish and expand computer science departments, and began to be research-active largely through European research funding (Breznitz 2007). One of the two universities became one of the largest recipients in Europe for grants in computer science, and soon, became home for product-oriented, highly successful academic spinoffs (Breznitz 2007). A rapid expansion of technical manpower also led to serious brain drain particularly in the 1980s when the economy was still weak. 25% of all graduates were emigrating in the late 1980s, to be contrasted with 5-6% in the early 1980s and again in the early 2000’ (Kapur and McHale 2005). The situation was much worse for technical skills, as nearly a half of graduates in electronic engineering and over a quarter of graduates in computer sciences were reported to emigrate in the mid 1980s (Sands 2005). The dynamic economic development, however, led to a dramatic turn around of this trend. In 1989, net emigration was as high as 43,900; by 1999 there was a net inward migration of 18,600. There are less detailed accounts of the Irish diaspora phenomenon that demonstrates the nature of brain circulation than for Taiwan or India. However, the returning Irish emigrants were substantially better educated than the home labour force, with 58% educated at the tertiary level, compared with 29% for non-returnees (Kapur and McHale 2005). The returning diaspora not only contributed to the ICT industry avoiding skills shortages experienced by many other countries in the 1990s, but also brought back valuable international experience and connections to the market abroad (Sands 2005). China and India. The experience of China and India are significantly different from each other, and contain important departures from other countries as well. China adds its own variation to the East Asian experience of industrial development, with heavy involvement of MNCs, many of which started their operations in China for mass production of simple products, allured by the availability of cheap labour and the promise of large domestic markets. Chinese industry gradually built up capabilities in high tech products over the past two decades. India’s experience appears to be an interesting case of leap-frogging. Not only did India leap into the heart of high tech service industry, but unlike others, it did so without there being any linkages to computer hardware industry. There has been little role played by MNCs except at the beginning stage (Kapur 2002, Saxenian 2006)); the Indian software industry evolved largely as a group of domestic companies, providing key customized services to overseas clients (Athreye 2005). The first role is the one both higher education systems appear to have played, in providing well educated manpower in science and engineering. However, it is not clear that the large number 11 of graduates all contributed. Both countries report serious unemployment and underemployment among graduates coexisting with key skills shortages, which suggest that they both have problems of highly variable quality standards (Agrawal 2007). Large numbers also do not mean that large proportions of their youths attend higher education either; at the time of their take off in the mid 1990s, their gross enrolment rates were still low at 5-7% (Table 2). The proportion of engineering graduates has been high in China but not particularly so in India (Table 7). One possible explanation is that both countries have had highly selective institutions which recruited high calibre students into engineering nationally, and these have set certain quality standards in engineering schools more generally. At the time of the take off, graduates from these selective schools are unlikely to have had strong competing labour market demand and even though the numbers of these graduates are small in Indian terms, they are significant and attractive enough for individual firms. The software industry’s success is also likely to have led to a significant expansion of private engineering institutions – the quality of which may be questionable. [Table 7] Chinese universities and public research institutes also played an unusual second role in establishing university enterprises since the late 1980s. Though they are often described as ‘spin-offs,’ they are owned and managed by universities and in that sense different from the normal academic spinoffs in the US or Europe (Eun and others 2006). Some of these companies have been spectacularly successful. For instance, three of the most successful PC companies, Lenovo, Founder and Tongfang were enterprises created by the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing University and Tsinghua University respectively. Some 40 university enterprises are already listed in stock markets in China and Hong Kong (Eun and others 2006). Of the 5000 or so university enterprises that were founded in the early 2000s, about 900 were ‘high-tech’ with a total profit of US$600 million (Ma 2007). The idea for universities to have their own enterprises was not new; in the 1950s and 60s universities often had affiliated production units which were used for training students (Ma 2007). What was new in the 1980s was the idea to use the same vehicle for commercializing university knowledge. The trend to set up university enterprises was prompted by several specific factors in the mid 1980s (Eun and others 2006, Ma 2007). The S&T reform starting in the 1980s transformed the roles of various S&T institutions, reduced the privileged role that public research institutions had in government funding, and strongly supported the research role of universities relevant for the society for the first time (Ma 2007). However, the endorsement of universities role in relevant research did not mean government funding was forthcoming, on the contrary, university budgets were extremely tight; universities had strong incentives to generate their own incomes through industrial contracting (Ma 2007). While universities were to play a key role in technology transfer, the absorptive capacity of industry was low. Creating their own enterprises may have been the simplest option through which universities could contribute to strengthening industrial capabilities (Eun and others 2006). Interestingly, the nature of knowledge content in these companies appears to be significantly different from that observed in academic spinoffs in the US. It was not that significant scientific research results were commercialized, rather, skilled personnel moved from universities to the commercial sector (Chen and Kenney 2007). 12 It is questionable how long the old tradition of university enterprise will continue into the future. Both the government and many universities may be going through a re-thinking process, as many enterprises have not been successful and managerial responsibilities are increasingly demanding (Kroll and Leifner 2008). It is possible that China’s university enterprise experience was a phenomenon dictated by the specific context at a specific time, with a new model of spinoffs which are a little closer to Western models emerging (Eun and others 2006, Kroll and Leifner 2008). The third role is one of brain drain/brain gain that the both countries experienced. China followed Taiwan in the brain gain that followed their brain drain experience in the 1980s. The Chinese government opened the door to aspiring students going abroad in the 1980s, and even developed their own fellowship programmes at the height of it. They were prepared to endorse this mass exodus because they knew that they needed them to go abroad to acquire key knowledge and skills. India had a longer experience of brain drain most evident in their best institutions such as the Indian Institute of Technology (IITs) dating back to their founding days in the 60s. It was not uncommon for these institutions to find that a large proportions of their graduating class would find graduate education possibilities in the US. In the survey of Silicon Valley professionals, Saxenian found that over half of Indians and nearly 80% of mainland Chinese had originally come to the US for their education (Saxenian 2002). Over 70% of mainland Chinese and nearly 60% of Indians had arrived in the US in the 1990s (Saxenian 2002). China was able to benefit doubly from diasporas, as Hsinchu-Silicon ValleyShangai increasingly became connected by broadly defined overseas Chinese engineers including those originally from Taiwan (Saxenian 2006). In the early 2000s, the Chinese government also stepped up effort to recruit back the overseas Chinese. For India, highly entrepreneurial diaspora also played a key ‘reputational intermediary’ role in connecting Indian firms to client US firms or to bring American MNCs to India (Kapur and McHale 2005, Saxenian 2006). The dominance of Indian entrepreneurs not only in Silicon Valley but more broadly in US high tech companies is well documented (Saxenian 2002, Wadha and others 2007). They appear to have been slower than their Chinese counterparts to return to India to play more visible roles, however, this appears to be happening now (Saxenian 2006, Kapur and McHale 2005, Kapur forthcoming). The fourth role that both Chinese and Indian higher education institutions are beginning to play is one of joint research with companies, which are increasingly including MNCs. In China, the significant component of joint R&D with MNCs appears to be redevelopment of foreign technology by Chinese universities to cater to Chinese firms or markets (Wu 2007). In India, elite institutions which are relatively more research-intensive did have a range of researchoriented relationships including those with MNCs (Basant and Chandra 2007). This is significantly different from any of the other country cases described above, except for the US and Israel. 13 What is motivating the MNCs and what specific roles are being played by universities in China and India? In China, the government has been applying pressures for MNCs to invest in R&D as a price to pay for accessing China’s vast market, and competition among MNCs to win government approval has been a factor in driving up R&D (Walsh 2003). MNCs’ partnerships may well be little more than the lip-service to satisfy governmental requirements. On the other hand, it is possible that the MNC need for certain R&D to ‘localize’ products to suit the Chinese market is being met by increasingly research-savvy Chinese universities. The need for round-the-clock R&D in software development or the need for cheap intelligent labour for R&D related to software or biotechnology may also be reasons why MNCs would want to work in environments such as India or China. However, the possibility that both Chinese and Indian institutions may be playing similar research roles in their relationships with MNCs is surprising, as the two governments could not have been more different in their approach to creating scientific research capacity in their universities. In China, the government has been taking steps to reform the system since the 1980s – and in the retrospect, these steps appear to be remarkably consistent ones that pushed the system towards the American research university model (Ma 2007). They have been systematically supporting the emergence of elite research universities through a series of programmes, starting from the key university and key laboratory programmes in the 1980s, the more famous Project 211 and Project 985 which concentrated government funding in top 100 and top 9 institutions respectively in the 1990s (Ma 2007). Together with the gradual development of competitive funding for research starting 1986, these resulted in strong incentives for universities to become research-oriented – to compete globally to become world class universities (Ma 2007). It is no accident that one of the first global rankings of universities came from one Chinese university – they were developing such indicators to inform themselves of their positions in the world. In India, there is a sense of crisis about the state of higher education (Agrawal 2007, Kapur and Mehta 2007). There has been no consistent set of policies to establish elite institutions after the creation of the Indian Institutes of Technology in the 1950s and 60s, and other specialized institutions such as the Indian Institute of Science (Jayaram 2007). The recommendations to develop high class universities had been made by a high level commission in the 1960s, but they were duly ignored, and the system expanded rapidly conditioned by policy makers who were more concerned about providing equitable opportunities than the quality of education (Jayaram 2007, Kapur and Mehta 2007). There has been little consistent policy push either to promote universities to work with industry or for them to become research oriented. The lack of research-orientation in higher education institutions at least in part reflect the fact that there is an extensive set of public research institutes, which are supposed to play the research role for the nation (Jayaram 2007). Still, it is true that India has globally respected professional/technical institutes as well as well established public research organizations, many of which appear to play critical roles in regions that have become hubs (Kapur 2001). Also, the policy context appears to be changing, as the government now plans a major expansion of professional institutions such as Indian Institutes of Technology, Indian Institutes of Science 14 and Engineering Research (IISER) and Indian Institutes of Information Technology. It is possible that they play equivalent roles of Chinese elite institutions. Summarizing Roles of Higher Education The international experience in developing high tech industry suggests that universities can and do play a diverse set of roles. First, there are three different types of education roles differentiated both by the level of education and the level of curricular relevance. Second, there is a role that higher education plays in selecting/screening. Third, there are two types of knowledge adaptation/dissemination role that may not require knowledge creation role. Fourth, there is a knowledge creation role in conducting relevant and fundamental science. As the international examples showed, many higher education institutions play multiple roles, and their role may change over time as well. Education related roles. The roles universities play differ significantly, not only in terms of the level of education provided (e.g. undergraduate vs. MA and PhDs), but also in terms of the relevance of what is taught. • Providing generic science and engineering graduates. In some cases, high tech industry evolved on the back of science and engineering graduates who were not necessarily trained in a specialization relevant to the industry. In Japan (and increasingly in India) where companies took large numbers of graduates, with a view to training them on the job, universities were merely expected to provide generic science and engineering skills. However, without such institutional willingness on the part of firms, this role is unlikely to be sufficient for the subsequent evolution of high tech industry. • Relevant education in emerging technical fields. Some institutions and countries were quicker to offer new fields or skills relevant to industrial needs than others. This responsiveness was particularly important when new disciplines such as computer science emerged, and appeared to give countries a competitive edge, as was clear in the case of Ireland. • Relevant advanced research training (masters and PhDs). The knowledge-intensive end of high tech industry requires key scientific capabilities inside firms. The fact that some American universities were capable of producing relevant research training was deemed critical for the evolution of Silicon Valley (Moore and Davis 2004). The fact that these universities were research-active in new fields relevant to industry, clearly helped them in producing research-trained graduates in relevant fields. However, the linkage between research capacity and related teaching is not automatic. Research capacity built outside universities (as in ITRI) may not necessarily be linked to graduate education. Even when research capacity within universities is improved, it does not automatically lead to the development of graduate schools, as the Japanese case demonstrates. 15 Selecting/screening high calibre individuals. Selectivity in higher education institutions can provide a critical role in screening and bringing together similar calibre individuals. This can help industry directly in screening their new recruits, as in Japan or Korea. Even when such selectivity led to serious cases of brain drain as in Taiwan, India or China, this led to the formation of entrepreneurial and highly informed diaspora which in time played a critical role in introducing high tech industry to their homeland. Knowledge dissemination/adaptation roles. Higher education institutions in developing countries often start out as teaching focussed institutions and develop some form of research capacity over time. However, two of the research related roles have little to do with ‘creating scientific knowledge,’ but are to do with bringing up the level of understanding to an international level. • Application oriented research. Some institutions have played key roles in conducting application oriented research or in deepening the local understanding of existing technologies. Taiwan’s ITRI/ERSO provides a vivid example of how local industrial capabilities were built around a public research institute, which in turn helped upgrade the technological capabilities of a whole group of high tech firms. Whether universities are expected to play this role depends on whether there are public research institutes which are dedicated to applied research. In Taiwan, this role was given to a public research institute, in spite of the fact that there were two university candidates near the Science Park. In Korea and India, the presence of public research institutes may have inhibited universities to develop significant application oriented research capacity (Jayaram 2007). In contrast, Chinese universities appear to have developed capacity for application oriented research which helps localization of technologies, with an increasing emphasis on fundamental research (Ma 2007). • Disseminating scientific information. Universities can also play a role by generally providing updated scientific information. This is not a trivial role in the world where high tech companies are constantly required to keep up with progress in multiple fields. As the industry evolves, it is also likely that companies are faced with constant needs to develop capabilities in new areas. Japanese universities appeared to have played a consistent role in this arena, which was necessary for domestic companies to update and modify their scientific base over time. Knowledge creation: relevant fundamental research. This is the role most visibly played by some American universities at the birth and evolution of some key high tech industry. Many universities in the world conduct excellent scientific research, and yet they may not play the proactive role that American scientists did. The difference may be that some scientists conduct research that are not only fundamental scientifically, but also highly relevant to the world of applications. They are also aware about the practical relevance of their scientific research. The star scientists in the early biotechnology revolution were not only prolific in basic research but were also highly aware of their potential applications. They were highly active in networking with relevant industries and took direct roles in the dissemination of tacit knowledge around fundamental discovery through academic spinoffs. Some institutions are 16 better at promoting relevant fundamental research than others, but equally, some countries are better at supporting a whole group of such institutions than others. There is a significant literature that discusses different linkages or forms of relationships between universities and industry such as spinoffs, research contracts, patenting/licensing, consulting, network meetings and science parks. Interestingly, the above discussions of international experience suggest that these ‘linkages’ may represent very different roles played by universities. For instance, university ‘spinoffs’ appeared to play visible roles when there is a significant capacity/knowledge gap between universities and surrounding industry, but the nature of this capacity/knowledge gap was very different between biotechnology in the US and ICT in China. In biotechnology in the US, the knowledge gap had to do with fundamental scientific discoveries with significant related tacit knowledge. In China, the nature of the knowledge gap appears to have been about existing technology that was new to China. The capacity gap may also arise because of the selectivity of universities; they may be better positioned to assemble a group of high calibre individuals to lead and work in new ventures. Technology transfer around patenting/licensing is another form of university-industry relationship which has been highly emphasized in many countries. Similar to spinoffs, it is a mechanism through which university-based knowledge can be transferred to industry. However, its effectiveness depends on the extent to which universities undertake significant knowledge creation and the level of development of intellectual property related institutions in the country. In the celebrated case of the US, the patenting practice evolved as one of many mechanisms of technology transfer from universities, predicated upon huge government funding in relevant scientific research (Mowery and others 2004, Rosenberg and Nelson 1994). It is also increasingly clear that for most of the universities in the US, patenting/licensing is a net drain rather than a source of additional income (Thursby and Thursby 2007). It is true that the wider acceptance of WTO and other international regimes related to intellectual property will undoubtedly have consequences for the paths that future developing economies can take in catching up. While it is important for developing countries and their universities to increase their understanding about intellectual property, indiscriminate opening of technology transfer offices in universities with a view to patenting their inventions may be unwarranted. The extent to which reversed brain drain – or brain circulation – contributed to the rise of high tech industry is a pertinent one related the role of higher education. While the full effects of brain drain/brain circulation are outside the scope of this paper, brain circulation appears to play an increasingly important role in the introduction of high tech industry into a new country. This undoubtedly reflects the increasingly global nature of the labour markets in developed countries, many of which are actively recruiting professionals from developing countries in areas of key skills shortages such as ICT. It is interesting to see approaches taken by some governments in dealing with brain drain. The Taiwanese were sending fellowships abroad even at the height of their worst brain drain. They apparently did so with the belief that they will gain in the end. A decade later, the mainland Chinese government was doing something similar. Both valued the foreign education 17 sufficiently to send them abroad in the first place, but both also worked hard to bring them back. It is almost as though for the Taiwanese and Chinese governments, foreign institutions, particularly in the US, were a critical component of their higher education system, providing the kind of education that their domestic institutions could not provide. Institutional Characteristics It is clear that not all the institutions can play the same roles. Indeed institutions have very different characteristics depending on their historical development paths as well as the phase of development. From the above discussions, three dimensions or ‘traits’ emerge as critical in defining the nature of higher education institutions and the roles they can play: (a) responsiveness; (b) fundamental science orientation; (c) selectivity. Some institutions or systems appear more ‘responsive’ to the needs of the society than others. They are tuned into societal needs in education and research, able to detect changes in labour market needs as well as social demand/student preferences, and take appropriate actions in updating curricular content as a matter of course, and introduce new fields of specialization. It is also evident that there are two types of ‘responsiveness.’ One is to respond to an existing demand, and the other is to respond to an anticipated demand. The former is an issue that can be readily undertaken by institutions – though this will require certain institutional capacity. Responding to future demand is harder for individual institutions and indeed this is where there appears to be a role for government. Many governments played the critical role of establishing generic science and engineering education well before there is labour market demand, and that turned out to be a critical investment that started the chain of events. Government can also play a critical role in identifying future demand for certain types of scientific research – as the US or Israeli governments did. ‘Defence’ played an active role in these countries, perhaps because defence related R&D is one for which many nations are willing to invest heavily. But future demand in other civilian sectors may equally be articulated through government research agenda, for instance, in agriculture as seen both in the US and Israeli cases, or in health as exemplified by the US case. The second dimension concerns the commitment to fundamental science. Again, some institutions are more committed to this than others. This means they value cutting edge science, reward key scientific discoveries, and encourage their researchers to actively define the direction of scientific research. Those that are developing such an orientation are unlikely to be active at the frontiers of international science, and may undertake research activities which does not change fundamental understandings. However, their engagement in international science gives them valuable exposure to the changing body of scientific knowledge – and this helped them to keep the rest of the country abreast of scientific developments. Yet others conduct hardly any research at all and remain teaching focussed institutions. Responsiveness – or application-orientation and fundamental science orientation expressed as two distinct dimensions was an idea first proposed by Stokes (1997). This separation of 18 dimensions is powerful in that it immediately allows us to understand four different types of institutions. Institutions can be scientifically oriented, but not responsive – as many of the Japanese and European universities appear to have been. Second, some institutions can be scientific but at the same time responsive to societal needs, as some of the American institutions appear to be. Third, some institutions are responsive but not fundamental science oriented – as Chinese universities appear to have been until recently. Other examples may include the Grandes Ecoles in France as well as polytechnics and their equivalents in a number of countries. Fourth, institutions may indeed be neither responsive nor research oriented. Liberal arts colleges in the US and a vast majority of teaching focussed institutions in the world probably fall into this category. There is one further dimension that helps us understand differences in institutional characteristics: selectivity. In the extreme case, a highly selective institution may not do anything other than being selective and still play a key role in helping screening talent. Non selective institutions will have to do a lot more to play significant roles. And again, ‘selectivity’ may be established in an institution irrespective of whether they are responsive or scientific. This is the dimension that distinguishes between the Grandes Ecoles in France from polytechnics in various countries which otherwise occupy the same space in terms of high responsiveness and low scientific orientation. Concluding remarks This paper has argued that higher education institutions can play a variety of roles in supporting high tech industry. The roles they play in turn can influence the shape and nature of the high tech industry. The paper also argued that not all higher education institutions or systems can play the same set of roles. Rather, the roles they play are themselves determined by the characteristics that the institutions developed over the years in terms of their responsiveness, fundamental science orientation and selectivity. Goverments can play a critical role in influencing the orientations of institutions –through subtle or not so subtle means. The fact that there are these three apparently independent dimensions leads to a question about which one (or what combination) should be given a priority in the development of higher education systems. Is there a logical sequence through which these dimensions be developed? ‘Selectivity’ is one dimension of higher education institutions which often emerges naturally as the demand for higher education expands and the competition for places increases. However, over time, such selectivity needs to be underpinned by robust selection systems that are fair but also provide good learning incentives for future students. This is not easy, but worth considerable attention, as selection systems can influence directly the reputational hierarchy of institutions as well as learning incentives of students for years to come. Some examinations inadvertently encourage students to become tactical rather than learning oriented. Equally, some scoring systems give spurious impression of accuracy. Fundamental science orientation is something that requires serious commitment and investments usually from the government. Investments are needed not only in human capital in 19 terms of advanced research training, but also in infrastructures such as libraries and laboratories, and actual expenses associated with research. It is a tradition that cannot be developed overnight. However, it is also a tradition which is hard to change once introduced, as PhD trained academics usually gravitates towards research rather than teaching, and there is often a sense of elitism associated with being research-oriented. Responsiveness is also not a dimension that develops naturally –indeed it is arguably the hardest one to build either in a system or an institution. There are standard practices that can be used to introduce scientific orientation in higher education systems, such as peer review or competitive research funding processes, and indeed developing countries have an option to ‘piggy back’ on the institutional infrastructures such as PhD training or international journals. In contrast, there is no simple recipe to encourage institutions to become responsive. ‘Demand’ to which institutions must learn to be responsive is often local and intangible. Governments may demand institutions to provide new educational programmes or to expand them; simply responding to such a top-down requirement does not make them responsive. Korean government’s central mandate to keep up the quota for engineering programmes may not have led institutions to become responsive. Indeed, one could imagine a scenario in which the more frequent government interferences, through regulations or even through financial incentives, the less institutions learn to be creative and strategic about what they do. In Ireland and Finland, a whole new group of institutions had to be established from a scratch, to become responsive. Founding ethos does seem to matter, as the examples of Land Grant Colleges in the US show. Equally, societal expectations that universities should be relevant also can help. American government’s expectation that universities must be useful for agriculture was a starting point in their funding agricultural extension activities in universities. Chinese government’s explicit demands that universities must play a key role in technological upgrading of the society, no doubt provided a powerful starting point for them to work with industry. The fact that ‘funding’ for such activities had to be sought from individual enterprises rather than some central agency was probably helpful in that universities had to learn to work with a variety of ‘stakeholders.’ On the whole, there appear to be more examples of institutions which developed responsiveness first followed by fundamental science orientation (one good example being Massachusetts Institute of Technology – see Etzkowitz 2002), and it is probably easier to do so than the other way around. The fact that the three dimensions are important in enabling institutions to play key roles does not mean that all institutions must be the same. On the contrary, as the case of Finland showed, there may be a strong case for requisite variety – or diversification in a country. Indeed, it is reasonable for a national system of higher education to contain all types of institutions – each playing somewhat different roles. One historical legacy that the case countries share is some form of national championship of science and technology. The post war US was a special place in terms of policy makers endorsing the role of science for societal benefit, and that commitment and belief led to the development of a whole host of federal funding institutions which were to support fundamental science for different reasons (Geiger 2004). Similarly, without the highest commitment from 20 Jawaharlal Nehru, the first post-independence leader in India, the Indian Institutes of Technology would have never received the extraordinary technical assistance from the US, Soviet Union and Germany to develop the high standards that they did. Without the commitment of Deng Xiaoping, the Chinese government would have not committed as much resources to science and technology, which in turn helped attract the best and the brightest to the field. Such visible support of science and technology at highest levels, probably help foster commitment to science and technology within the society such that their students more readily choose to study science and engineering. Such national championship is not easy to maintain over time. Science is expensive and it takes a long time before its impact can be felt. It is easy for commitment to science to give way to fiscal pressures, particularly given that it is never clear how much is needed. It is also not easy to cultivate a high level of interest within the society to induce students to choose science and engineering. Many OECD countries, such as the US, UK and Japan are increasingly concerned about the level of interest among their students in science. Even in India, there is an emerging concern that less students are taking a science track. One final point for reflection is the role of governance arrangements at both institutional and national levels. Quality assurance considerations often lead government bodies to become overly prescriptive about inputs as well as outputs. This is a significant dilemma in developing countries, where there is little tradition and culture about the quality of higher education. Attempts by governments to ‘control’ quality can lead to institutions becoming similar to each other and to being passive in defining what they are. To make the matters worse, some dimensions are easier to measure than others; publications and citations are often used for evaluating the quality of scientific research, but there are no established metrics that look at responsiveness. Metrics used to ‘control’ or ‘guide’ could themselves be skewed. Tight regulatory control by the government can also be a serious impediment when institutions need to respond to changing needs of the nation. And yet, the desire to ‘respond’ to national needs both from labour markets and from future students, particularly in dynamically developing countries, often pushes governments to centralize key decisions about the size and directions of the higher education system. Institutional capabilities to ‘respond’ to complex demands are unlikely to develop if institutions are not allowed to make strategic decisions. Managerial autonomy and academic autonomy to decide what to teach and research are critical elements to foster responsiveness in institutions. At the same time, institutions are also unlikely to be able to make strategic decisions without governance arrangements which allow appropriate structures and processes to develop internally. The key for the future is to put in place governance arrangements at both institutional and system levels, which meet the balance of such competing concerns and which guide evolving higher education systems effectively. 21 Table 1: Total enrollments: advanced research (PhD) progammes 1970 1980 1990 2000 2003 2006 % of Tertiary China 54,038 108,737 ... ... Finland 19,750 19,846 22,145 7.2 India 55,019 65,357 36,519 Ireland 2,904 3,816 5,146 2.8 Israel 6,647 7,944 9,715 3.1 Japan 13,243 18,211 28,354 59,007 68,245 75,028 1.8 Republic of Korea 28,924 34,712 41,055 1.3 Taiwan 13,822 21,658 29,839 2.3 United States 293,002 306,889 388,685 2.2 Source: UNESCO database accessed May 7, 2008, Education Statistics, Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, Japan; Education statistics, Ministry of Education, Taiwan Tanble 2: Tertiary gross enrollment ratio 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2006 China 0 1 2 3 3 5 8 .. 22 Finland 13 28 32 34 48 70 83 92 93 India 5 5 5 6 6 7 10 11 12 Ireland 12 17 18 22 31 40 49 58 59 Israel 18 23 29 33 36 41 50 58 58 Japan 18 26 31 28 31 42 47 55 57 Korea, Rep. 7 9 15 34 39 52 73 90 91 Taiwan 39 56 82 84 United States 47 55 56 60 72 81 69 82 82 Source: Unesco database and World Bank database accessed May 7, 2008, Education indicators from Ministry of Education, Taiwan *Total number of students in tertiary education including graduate schools as a percentage of the poputation in the five year age group following on from secondary school leaving age Table 3: Public expenditure per pupil as a % of GDP per capita (Tertiary level) 1999 2000 2004 2005 China 90 ... ... ... Japan 15 18 21 19 Republic of Korea 8 ... 9 ... Finland 41 39 37 35 Ireland 29 31 24 25 Israel 33 32 26 ... United States 27 ... 23 23 India ... 91 94 58 Source: UNESCO database accessed May 7, 2008 22 Table 4: Tertiary education expenditures as % of GDP 1999 2000 2004 2005 China Private expenditure as % of GDP ... ... ... ... Public expenditure as % of GDP 0.4 ... ... ... Total expenditure as % of GDP ... ... ... ... Japan Private expenditure as % of GDP 0.6 0.6 0.8 0.9 Public expenditure as % of GDP 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 Total expenditure as % of GDP 1.1 1.1 1.3 1.4 Republic of Korea Private expenditure as % of GDP 1.7 ... 1.9 ... Public expenditure as % of GDP 0.4 ... 0.5 ... Total expenditure as % of GDP 2.2 ... 2.3 ... Finland Private expenditure as % of GDP ... ... 0.1 0.1 Public expenditure as % of GDP 1.7 1.7 1.7 1.7 Total expenditure as % of GDP ... 1.7 1.8 1.8 Ireland Private expenditure as % of GDP ... ... ... 0.2 Public expenditure as % of GDP 1.0 ... 0.9 0.9 Total expenditure as % of GDP ... ... ... 1.2 Israel Private expenditure as % of GDP ... 0.9 1.0 ... Public expenditure as % of GDP 1.2 1.1 1.0 ... Total expenditure as % of GDP ... 2.0 2.0 ... United States Private expenditure as % of GDP ... 1.7 2.0 2.0 Public expenditure as % of GDP 1.1 0.9 1.1 1.1 Total expenditure as % of GDP ... 2.6 3.1 3.0 India Private expenditure as % of GDP ... 0.2 ... Public expenditure as % of GDP ... 0.9 1.0 ... Total expenditure as % of GDP ... 0.9 ... ... Source: UNESCO database as accessed May 7, 2008 Table 5: Academic R&D financed by industry, by selected OECD countries: 1981–2006 (Percent) Year France Germany Japan South Korea UK U.S. All OECD China Russia 1981 1.3 1.8 1.0 NA 2.8 4.4 2.9 NA NA 1986 2.0 5.8 1.7 NA 5.7 6.5 4.5 NA NA 1991 4.2 7.0 2.4 NA 7.8 6.8 6.0 NA NA 1996 3.2 9.2 2.4 50.5 6.7 7.1 6.9 NA 23.7 2001 3.1 12.2 2.3 14.3 6.2 6.5 6.4 NA 26.5 2002 2.9 11.8 2.8 13.9 5.8 5.8 6.2 NA 27.2 2003 2.7 12.6 2.9 13.6 5.6 5.3 6.0 35.9 27.9 2004 2.7 13.2 2.8 15.9 5.1 5.1 6.2 37.1 32.6 2005 NA NA NA 15.2 NA 5.2 NA 36.7 29.3 2006 NA NA NA NA NA 5.3 NA NA NA Source: National Science Foundation Science and Engineering Indicators 2008 23 24 25 Table 6: Science and engineering articles by country: 1995-2005 Pulibcation per million population Average annual change (%) Region/country/economy 1995 2000 2005 1995– 2000 1995– 2005 Finland 4,077 4,844 4,811 914 3.5 –0.1 1.7 Ireland 1,218 1,581 2,120 502 5.4 6.0 5.7 China 9,061 18,479 41,596 31 15.3 17.6 16.5 India 9,370 10,276 14,608 13 1.9 7.3 4.5 Israel 5,741 6,290 6,309 926 1.8 0.1 0.9 Japan 47,068 57,101 55,471 434 3.9 –0.6 1.7 South Korea 3,803 9,572 16,396 341 20.3 11.4 15.7 Taiwan 4,759 7,190 10,841 474 8.6 8.6 8.6 United States 193,337 192,743 205,320 678 –0.1 1.3 0.6 Table 7: Total tertiary enrollments in science and engineering 2000 2005 % of total enrollments 2000– 2005 NOTES: Article counts from set of journals covered by Science Citation Index (SCI) and Social Sciences Citation Index (SSCI). Articles classified by year of publication and assigned to region/country/economy on basis of institutional address(es) listed on article. Articles on fractional-count basis, i.e., for articles with collaborating institutions from multiple countries/economies, each country/economy receives fractional credit on basis of proportion of its participating institutions. SOURCES: Thomson Scientific, SCI and SSCI, http://scientific.thomson.com/products/categories/citation/; ipIQ, Inc.; and National Science Foundation, Division of Science Resources Statistics, special tabulations.as published in Science and Engineering Indicators 2008, population data from the World Bank database accessed May 7,2008, National Statistics, Taiwan, Science/Engineering ratio Science Engineering Science Engineering Total Science Engineering S&Eng China ... ... Finland 28626 69230 35468 80827 305996 12% 26% 38% 0.4 India **+ 1528841 418193 1689504 696609 11777296 14% 6% 20% 2.4 Ireland 27087 18241 22851 19233 186561 12% 10% 23% 1.2 Israel 35057 39138 29967 56812 310937 10% 18% 28% 0.5 Japan 112428 706998 118704 668526 4038302 3% 17% 19% 0.2 Republic of Korea 208691 1096304 264259 1022845 3224875 8% 32% 40% 0.3 United States ... 1537243 1154971 17272044 9% 7% 16% 1.3 Source: UNESCO database accessed May 7, 2008 ** India's data on 2000 are actually from year 2001 26 References Agarwal, Pawan. 2007. Higher education and labour market in India. Paper presented at the World Bank ABCDE conference. Arora, Ashish and Gambardella, Alfonso ed. 2005, From underdogs to tigers: the rise and growth of the software industry in Brazil, China, India, Ireland, and Israel. Oxford: Oxford University Press Athreye, Suma S. 2005. “The Indian Software industry.” In Ashish Arora and Alfonso Gambardella eds., From underdogs to tigers: the rise and growth of the software industry in Brazil, China, India, Ireland, and Israel. Oxford: Oxford University Press Baba, Y, Takai S, and Mizuta Y. 1996. “The user driven evolution of the Japanese software industry: the case of customized software for mainframes.” In D. C. Mowery, ed. The international computer software industry: a comparative study of industry evolution and structure. New York: Oxford University Press Basant, Rakesh and Chandra, Pankaj. 2007. “Role of educational and R&D institutions in city clusters: an exploratory study of Bangalore and Pune regions in India.” World Development 35(6): 1037-1055 Ben-David, J. 1977. Centers of learning: Britain, France, Germany and the Unites States. New York: McGraw-Hill. Branscomb, Lewis, Kodama, Fumio and Florida, Richard. 1999. Industrializing knowledge: University-industry linkages in Japan and the US. Cambridge and London: MIT Press Bresnahan, Timothy and Gambardella, Alfonso ed. 2004. Building high tech clusters: silicon valley and beyond, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Cheng, Tun-jen. 1992. Dilemmas and choices in educational policies: the case of South Korea and Taiwan. Studies in comparative international development. 27 (4): 54-79 Chun, Kun and Kenney, Martin. 2007. “Universities/research institutes and regional innovation systems: the cases of Beijing and Schenzhen.” World Development 35(6):1056-1074 Clark, Burton R. 1995. Places of inquiry: research and advanced education in modern universities. Berkeley, Los Angeles and London: University of California Press Cooke, P. 1992. Regional Innovation Systems Competitive Regulation in the New Europe. Geoforum, 23(3): 365-382. Dahlman, Carl, Routti, Jorma, and Yla-Anttila, Pekka. 2007. Finland as a knowledge economy: elements of success and lessons learned. Washington: World Bank Institute 27 Darby, Michael R. and Lynne G. Zucker. 1996. Star scientists, institutions and the entry of Japanese biotechnology enterprises. NBER Working Paper 5795. Donnely, Tom and Martti Hyry. 2004. “Urban and Regional High Technologies: the Case of Ourlu.” Loca Economy 19(2): 134-149 Dore, Ronald P. and Mari Sako. 1989. How the Japanese learn to work. London and New York: Routledge Eun, Jong-Hak, Lee, Keun and Guisheng Wu. 2006. “Explaining University-run enterprises in China: A theoretical framework for university-industry relationship in developing countries and its application to China.” Research Policy 35: 1329-1346 Etzkowitz, Henry and Leydesdorff, Loet. 2000. “The dynamics of innovation: from National Systems and Mode 2 to a Triple Helix of university-industry-government relations.” Research Policy 29: 109-123 Etzkowitz, Henry. 2002. MIT and the rise of entrepreneurial science. London and New York: Routledge Geiger, Roger. 2004b. Research and relevant knowledge: American Research Universities since World War II. New Brunswick and London: Transaction Publishers Goodman, Roger. 2005. Whither the Japanese University? An Introduction to the 2004 Higher Education Reforms in Japan. In Eades, J.S., Goodman, Roger and Hada, Yumiko eds. The Big Bang in Japanese Higher Education. Melbourne: Trans Pacific Press Hashimoto, Takehiko. 1999. “The hesitant relationship reconsidered: university-industry cooperation in postwar Japan.” In Branscomb, Lewis, Kodama, Fumio and Florida, Richard, eds. 1999. Industrializing knowledge: University-industry linkages in Japan and the US. Cambridge and London: MIT Press Hatakenaka, Sachi. 2004. University-industry partnerships in MIT, Cambirdge and Tokyo: storytelling across boundaries. New York: Routledge Henderson, Rebecca, Orsenigo, Luigi, and Pisano, Gary P. 1999. “The pharmaceutical industry and the revolution in molecular biology: interactions among scientific, institutional and organizational change. In Mowery, David and Nelson, Richard ed. Sources of industrial leadership: studies of seven industries. Cambridge 1999 Hoshino, Yu, Harayama, Yuko and Hatatani, Shigeo. 200. Daigaku no gaibu henka heno taio sei (Responsiveness of universities to external change) in Harayama, Yuko ed. Sangaku Renkei. Tokyo: Toyokeizaishimposha 28 Hou, Chi-Ming and San Gee. 1993. “National Systems Supporting Technical Advance in Industry: The Case of Taiwan.” In Nelson, Richard R. ed., National Innovation Systems: A comparative Analysis. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press Juahiainen, Jussi S. 2006. “Multipolis: High-technology Network in Northern Finland.” European Planning Studies 14(10): 1407-1428 Kapur, Devesh. The Causes and Consequences of India’s IT Boom. 2002. India Review 1(2): 91-110 Kapur, Devesh and Pretap Bhanu Mehta. 2007. “Morgaging the future? Indian higher education.” Paper presented at Brookings-NCAER India Policy Forum 2007 Kapur, Devesh and McHale, John. 2005. “Sojourns and software: international mobile human capital and high tech industy development in India, Ireland and Israel.” In Arora, Ashish and Gambardella, Alfonso ed. 2005, From underdogs to tigers: the rise and growth of the software industry in Brazil, China, India, Ireland, and Israel. Oxford: Oxford University Press Kenny, Martin. 2007. Globalization of R&D and innovation. Congressional Testimony given dated October 4 Kim, Ki-Seok, and Sunghee Nam. 2007. “The Making of a World-Class University at the Periphery.” In Altbach, Philp G, and Jorge Balan eds., Transforming Resaerch Universities in Asia and Latin America: World Class Worldwide. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press Kim, Limsu. 1993. “National System of Industrial Innovation: Dynamics of Capability Building in Korea.” In Nelson, Richard R. ed., National Innovation Systems: A comparative Analysis. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press Kim, Limsu. 2000. “Korea’s National Innovation System in Transition.” In Kim, Limsu and Nelson, Richard R. eds., Technology, learning and innovation: experiences of newly industrializing economies. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press Kobayashi, Shinichi. 2001. “Daigaku kyoiku no shokugyoteki relevance to daigaku no soshiki sekkei.” (Relevance of university education to work and organizational design). In Aoki, Masahiko, Sawa, Akihiro, and Daito, Michio eds. 2001. Daigaku kaikaku: kadai to souten. Tokyo: Toyokeizai shinposha. Kodama, Fumio and Suzuki, Jun. 2007. How Japanese companies have used scientific advances to restructure their businesses: the receiver-active national system of innovation. World Development, Vol 35, No. 6 976-990 Korean Council for University Education. 1990. Korean Higher Education: Its development, Aspects and Prospects. 29 Korean Educational Development Institute (KEDI). 2004. OECD Thematic Review of Tertiary Education: Country Background Report for Korea. Kroll, Henning and Ingo Leifner. 2008. ”Spin-off enterprises as a means of technology commercialisation in a transforming economy – Evidence from three universities in China.” Technovation 28:298-313 Lee, Sungho H. 2004. “Korean higher education: history and future challenges.” In Philip G. Altbach and Toru Umakoshi eds. Asian Universities: historical perspectives and comtemporary challenges Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press. Leifner, Ingo and Daniel Schiller. 2008. “Academic capabilities in developing countriesa conceptual framework with empirical illustrations from Thailand.” Research Policy. 37: 276293. Lester, Richard, and Piore, Michael. 2004. Innovation: the missing dimension. Cambridge and London: Harvard University Press Lester, Richard. 2005. Universities, Innovation and the competitiveness of local economies: a summary report from the Local Innovation Systems Project – Phase I. MIT IPC Working Paper IPC-050-010 Ministry of Education, Finland. 2005. OECD thematic review of tertiary education. Country Background report for Finland. Moore, Gordon and Kevin Davis. 2004. “Learning the Silicon Valley Way.” In Bresnahan, Timothy and Gambardella, Alfonso eds., Building high tech clusters: silicon valley and beyond. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Mowery, David ed. 1996. The international computer software industry: a comparative study of industry evolution and structure. New York: Oxford University Press Mowery, David and Nelson, Richard ed. 1999. Sources of industrial leadership: studies of seven industries. Cambridge University Press Mowery, David. 1999. “The computer software industry.” In Mowery, David and Nelson, Richard ed. Sources of industrial leadership: studies of seven industries. Cambridge University Press Mowery, David, Nelson, Richard R., Sampat, Bhaven N., Ziedonis, Arvids A. 2004. Ivory tower and industrial innovation: university-industry technology transfer before and after the BayhDole Act. Stanford: Stanford University Press 30 Nakayama, Shigeru. 1991. Science, technology and society in postwar Japan. Kegan Paul International National Academy of Sciences. 2005. Rising above the Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America for Brighter Economic Future. Washington: National Academies Press National Science Foundation. 2007. Asia’s Rising Science and Technology Strength: Comparative Indicators for Asia, the European Union and the United States. Washington, D.C.: National Science Foundation Nelson, Richard ed. 1993. The national innovation system: a comparative analysis. New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). 2003. Reviews of Naitonal Policies for Education: Polytechnic Education in Finland. Paris: OECD Odagiri, Hiroyuki and Goto, Akira. 1996. Technology and industrial development in Japan: building capabilities by learning, innovation and public policy. Oxford: Oxford University Press Owen-smith, Jason, Massimo Riccaboni, Fabio Pammolli and Walter W. Powell. 2002. “A comparison of US and European university-industry relations in the Life Sciences.” Management Sicnece. 48(1): 24-43 Pisano, Gary P. 2006. “Can science be a business? Lessons from biotech.” Harvard Business Review, October: 114-125 Roper, Stephen and Seamus Grimes. 2005. “Wireless valley, silicon wadi and digital island – Helsinki, Tel Aviv and Dublin and the ICT global production network.” Geoforum 36: 297-313 Rosenberg, Nathan and Richard Nelson. 1994. “American universities and technical advance in industry.” Research Policy (23): 323-248 Sand, Anita. 2005. “The Irish software industry.” In Ashish Arora and Alfonso Gambardella eds., From underdogs to tigers: the rise and growth of the software industry in Brazil, China, India, Ireland, and Israel. Oxford: Oxford University Press Saxenian, Annalee. 1994. Regional Advantage: culture and competition in Silicon Valley and Route 128. Cambridge and London: Harvard University Press. Saxenian, Annalee. 1999. Silicon Valley’s New Immigrant Entrepreneurs. San Francisco : Public Policy Institute of California Saxenian, Annalee, Motoyama, Yasuyuki, and Xiaohong Quan. 2002. Local and Global Networks of Immigrant Professionals in Silicon Valley. San Francisco: Public Policy Institute of California 31 Saxenian, Annalee. 2004. “Taiwan’s Hsinchu Region: Imitator and Partner for Silicon Valley.” In Bresnahan, Timothy and Gambardella, Alfonso ed., Building high tech clusters: silicon valley and beyond. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Saxenian, Annalee. 2006. The new Argonauts: regional advantage in a global economy. Cambridge and London: Harvard University Press Shimizu, Kiyoyuki, and Mori, Kazuhiro. 2001. Nihon no rikokei daigakuinkyoiku no bapponteki kaikaku (Fundamental reform for graduate schools in Japan) in Aoki, Masahiko, Sawa, Akihiro, and Michio Daito eds., Daigaku kaikaku: kadai to souten. Tokyo: Toyokeizai shinposha. Sohn, Dong-Won, and Kenny, Martin. 2007. “Universities, clusters, innovation systems: the case of Seoul, Korea.” World Development 35(6): 991-1004 Stokes, Donald E. 1997. Pasteurs quadrant: basic science and technological innovation. Washington, D. C.: Brookings Institution Press Srinivas, Smita and Kimmo Viljamaa. 2008. ”Emergence of Economic Institutions: Analysing the Third Role of Universities in Turku, Finland.” Regional Studies 42(3); 323-341 Thursby, Jerry G. and Marie C. Thursby. 2007. “University licensing.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 23(4): 620-639 Trajtenberg, Manuel. 2001. “Innovation in Israel 1968-1997: a comparative analysis using patent data.” Research Policy 30: 363-389 UNCTAD. 2005. World Investment Report: Transnational corporations and the internationalization of R&D. New York and Geneva: 2005 Wadhwa, Vivek, AnnaLee Saxenian, Ben Rissing and Gary Gereffi. 2007. “America’s New Immigrant Entrepreneurs.” http://memp.pratt.duke.edu/downloads/americas_new_immigrant_entrepreneurs.pdf Walsh, Kathleen. 2003. Foreign high-tech R&D in China: risks, rewards and implications for U.S.-China relations. Washington: The Henry L. Stimson Center White, Tony. 2001. Investing in people: higher education in Ireland from 1960-2000. Dublin: Institute of Public Administration Wu, Weiping. 2007. “Cultivating research universities and industrial linkages in China: the case of Shanghai.” World Development 35(6): 1075-1093 32 Yusuf, Shahid and Nabeshima, Kaoru. 2007. How universities promote economic growth. Washington: The World Bank Zhou, Ji. 2005. Higher education in China. Cengage Learning Zucker, Lynne G., Darby, Micharel R., and Armstrong, Jeff S. 2002. “Commercializing knowledge: university science, knowledge capture and firm performance in biotechnology.” Management Science 48(1): 138-153 Zucker, Lynne G., Darby, Michael R. and Brewer, Marilyn B. 1998. “Intellectual human capital and the birth of US biotechnology enterprises.” The American Economic Review. 88(1): 290306 Zucker, Lynn G. and Darby, Michael R. 1996. “Star scientists and institutional transformation: patterns of invention and innovation in the formation of the biotechnology industry.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 93(23): 12709-12716 33
