Report of the  Central Advisory Board of Education (CABE) Committee  On  Autonomy of Higher Education Institutions  Ministry of Human Resource Development Department of Secondary and Higher Education Government of India New Delhi-110001  June, 2005  New Delhi June, 2005  Dear Shri Arjun Singh Ji,  I was given the responsibility of being the Chairman of the CABE Committee on Autonomy of Higher Education Institutions and it is a pleasure for me now to submit to you the Report of the Committee.  The CABE has been revived at a time when higher education is facing enormous challenges. In such a situation we need to revisit our policies and programmes with a view to making them deal effectively with the emerging realities. Simultaneously, we need to understand that development can best be ensured by freeing the higher education system of unnecessary controls and regulations and withdrawing avoidable state interventions. In pursuance of this realization, the Government of India, Ministry of Human Resource Development set up, among others, a Committee on Autonomy of Higher Education Institutions to suggest measures for enhancing the autonomy and accountability of institutions of higher education. The Committee adopted a two-pronged strategy for the purpose of soliciting views, comments and observations from a large body of stakeholders and this included eliciting responses to a structured questionnaire and organization of four Regional Workshops. The Committee also had an exclusive interaction with the representatives of AIFUCTO. Besides, the Committee held a series of wide ranging consultations with various other informed members of the higher education family.  The CABE Committee is of the view that Autonomy of Higher Education Institutions is a pre-requisite for enabling them to achieve their goals and objectives. An honest exercise of autonomy academic, administrative and financial – will lead to making these Institutions as centres of innovation, excellence and development. With this in view the Universities need to be insulated from internal and external pressures of all kinds, may be bureaucratic, political and other groups. Towards this end, University Grants Commission, Government of India and State Governments will have to evolve strategies to realize the intended objective.  Since, autonomy of higher education institution goes hand-in-hand with its accountability, the delegation and devolution of power and authority concomitant with responsibility should flow not only from the external environment to the higher education institution but should be given at different levels within the higher education institution itself. There should be a charter of responsibility and devolution and delegation of authority defined for different levels within the university system and both should be monitored together.  The present Report is the outcome of the combined efforts of many people. The valuable contributions of the members of the Committee and others who participated in the discussion have immensely benefited the development of the Report. I trust the recommendations contained therein will be of interest to the policy executives, managers, administrators engaged in the development and promotion of higher education in the country.  I would like to place on record my appreciation of the contributions of Prof. Ved Prakash in discharging admirably his responsibility as Member Secretary of the Committee and in ensuring that this Report was submitted in the prescribed time.  i  I shall fail in my duties if I do not place on record my appreciation for the untiring service rendered by Dr. (Mrs.) Renu Batra, Joint Secretary, University Grants Commission and other Academicians and Assistants.  With regards,  Yours sincerely  ( Kanti Biswas ) Chairman, CABE Committee on Autonomy of Higher Education Institutions  Shri Arjun Singh Ji Hon’ble Minister for Human Resource Development Government of India Shastri Bhawan New Delhi – 110 001  ii  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  I am indebted to several people and institutions for their help and advice in the execution of the various tasks related to the CABE Committee on Autonomy of Higher Education Institutions. At the outset, I would like to express my sincere thanks and gratitude to the Hon’ble Minister of Human Resource Development, Shri Arjun Singh Ji for reposing his faith and trust which encouraged me in discharging my responsibilities as the Member Secretary of the CABE Committee.  The invaluable support extended by Shri B.S. Baswan, Education Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD), Shri Sudeep Banerjee, Additional Secretary, MHRD and Shri Sunil Kumar, Joint Secretary, MHRD is gratefully acknowledged. But for their guidance, this task would not have been accomplished in the prescribed time.  I owe a lot to the Chairman of the Committee Shri Kanti Biswas, Hon’ble Minister for Education, Government of West Bengal for providing guidance at every stage of discussions on wide-ranging issues related to academic, administrative and financial autonomy deliberated by the Committee and incorporated in this Report. He is the person who inspired every meeting by his presence and made significant contributions towards comprehending the issues. I am also much obliged to all the members of the CABE Committee – Shri D. Manjunath, Hon’ble Minister for Education, Government of Karnataka; Dr. Shurhozelie, Hon’ble Minister for Education, Government of Nagaland; Shri Ajay Chandrakar, Hon’ble Minister for Education, Government of Chhattisgarh; Prof. P.V. Indiresan, Former Director, IIT, Chennai; Prof. Andre Beteille, Chairman, ICSSR; Prof. Gopal Guru, Professor of Political Science, Jawaharlal Nehru University; Chairman, UGC and Chairman, AICTE; who contributed immensely in providing ideas and references necessary for development of this Report.  I am also grateful to Prof. M. Anandakrishnan, Former Vice-Chairman, Tamil Nadu State Council of Higher Education; Prof. A. Gnanam, Former Vice-Chancellor, University of Madras and Pondicherry University; Dr. (Mrs.) Renu Batra, Joint Secretary, UGC; and Prof. (Mrs.) K. Sudha Rao, Vice-Chancellor, Karnataka State Open University for their academic inputs which greatly facilitated the formulation of the Report.  I am thankful to Prof. A.K. Sharma for his invaluable support in synthesizing the outcomes of the deliberations of the various working groups of the Regional Workshops besides editing the Report.  I would like to express my special appreciation to all those at the UGC who have contributed in one form or the other for their support and cooperation. Thanks are also due to my administrative staff Shri P.S. Rawat, Shri B. Ravi Narayanan, Shri Dharmender Pal Singh, Shri Sunil Keshwani and Shri Chaman Lal for the seemingly endless work of word processing and organization of various events required for successful completion of this onerous task.  (Ved Prakash) Member Secretary CABE-COAHEI & Secretary, UGC New Delhi June, 2005  iii  Composition of CABE Committee on Autonomy of Higher Education Institutions  1 Shri Kanti Biswas ... Chairman  2 Shri D. Manjunath ... Member  3 Dr. Shurhozelie ... Member  4 Shri Ajay Chandrakar ... Member  5 Prof. P.V. Indiresan ... Member  6 Prof. Andre Beteille ... Member  7 Chairman, UGC ... Member  8 Chairman, AICTE ... Member  9 Prof. Gopal Guru ... Member  10. Prof. Ved Prakash ... Member Secretary  Co-opted Members  1 Prof. M. Anandakrishnan ... Co-opted Member  2 Prof. A. Gnanam ... Co-opted Member  3 Prof. (Mrs.) Sudha Rao ... Co-opted Member  4 Dr. (Mrs.) Renu Batra ... Co-opted Member  iv  CONTENTS  Page No.  Letter of Submission : i  Acknowledgements : iii  Composition of the Committee : iv  Contents : v  List of Tables : ix  List of Annexures : xi  Abbreviations xii  Executive Summary : xiv  Chapter 1 The Contextual Framework of the Committee  1.1 Central Advisory Board of Education (CABE) : 1 1.2 CABE Committee on Autonomy of Higher Education Institutions : 2 1.3 Approach to the Task : 4 1.4 Format of the Report : 5  Chapter 2 Higher Education in India – An Overview  2.1 Higher Education Institutions : 6 2.2 Colleges : 7 2.3 Autonomous Colleges : 7 2.4 Enrolments : 8 2.5 Strength of Faculty : 9 2.6 Degree Award Structure : 10 2.7 Statutory Bodies in Higher Education : 11 2.8 State Councils of Higher Education : 13 2.9 Norms and Standards in Higher Education : 13 2.10 Open and Distance Learning in Higher Education : 14 2.11 Private Initiatives in Higher Education : 14 2.12 Trans-National Higher Education : 15  v  Chapter 3 Autonomy and Accountability of Higher Educations – A Conceptual  Framework  3.1 History of Efforts Towards Autonomy : 17 3.2 Current Situation : 18 3.3 The Expanding Higher Education System : 19 3.4 An Enabling Provision : 19 3.5 UGC Guidelines : 20 3.6 Concept of Autonomy : 20 3.7 Issues in Autonomy : 21 3.8 Aspects Relevant to Autonomy and Accountability : 21 3.9 Bench Marks of Autonomy and Accountability : 23 3.10 Academic Audit / Quality Assurance System : 23 3.11 Progress Towards Autonomy : 24  Chapter 4 Perceptions of Stakeholders on Autonomy of Higher  Education Institutions  4.1 The Need : 26 4.2 Profile, Institutional Category, Age of Institutions : 26 4.3 Academic Autonomy of Institutions : 29 4.4 Financial Autonomy : 40 4.5 Hypothesis and its Converse : 41 4.6 Qualitative Analysis of Responses on Academic,  Financial and Administrative Autonomy : 44 Chapter 5 Academic Autonomy  5.1 Scope of Academic Autonomy : 45 5.2 Basic Concerns for Academic Autonomy : 46 5.3 Major Inferences Based on Discussions : 46 A. Admissions : 46 B. Curriculum / Syllabi / New Courses : 46 C. Examination and Evaluation : 47 D. Nomenclature of the Degree : 48 E. Recruitment of Staff : 48 F. Teacher and Student Autonomy : 48 G. Accountability : 49 H. Constraints : 49  vi  Chapter 6 Administrative Autonomy  6.1 Scope of Administrative Autonomy : 50 6.2 Basic Concerns for Administrative Autonomy : 51 6.3 Major Inferences Based on Discussions : 51 A. Institutional Autonomy : 51 B. Common Admission Test : 52 C. Deciding Fee Structure : 52 D. Funds Disbursing Agencies : 52 E. University Act : 53 F. Multiplicity of Regulatory Bodies : 53 G. Internationalization of Higher Education : 53 H. Ratio of Teaching to Non-Teaching Staff : 53 I. Engaging Student Community : 53 J. Autonomy and Financial Dependence : 54 K. Material Resource Management : 54 L. Administrative Matters : 54 M. Restoring Autonomy : 54 N. Institutionalizing Regulatory Provisions : 55  Chapter 7 Financial Autonomy  7.1 Scope of Financial Autonomy : 56 7.2 Basic Concerns for Financial Autonomy : 57 7.3 Major Inferences Based on Discussions : 59 A. Allocation of Funds for Higher Education : 59 B. Disbursement of Funds : 60 C. Resource Generation : 60 D. Fee Structure / Scholarships and Freeships : 60 E. Audit and Accounting : 61 F. Delegation of Powers : 61 G. Austerity Measures : 62  Chapter 8 Recommendations  Academic Matters : 64 Administrative Matters : 67 Financial Matters : 69 General : 70  vii  Chapter 9 Salient Recommendations and Strategies for Implementation  Role of MHRD : 72 Role of UGC : 73 Role of State and Individual Institutions : 74  References : 75  viii  List of Tables  Page No.  1.1 Regional Workshops Organized : 5  2.1 Number of Higher Education Institutions : 7  2.2 Number of General and Professional Colleges : 7  2.3 Stagewise Enrolment of Students : 8  2.4 Facultywise Enrolment of Students : 9  2.5 Percentage of Enrolment of Relevant Age Group in Higher Education : 9  2.6 Faculty in University Departments and Colleges : 10  2.7 Regulatory and Statutory Bodies in Higher Education : 12  2.8 Number of Private Universities : 15  4.1 Category of Respondents : 26  4.2 Respondents Belonging to Category of Institutions : 27  4.3 Type of Respondent Institutions on the Issue of Accreditation : 28  4.4 Age of Respondent Institutions : 28  4.5 Level of Courses Taught in Respondent Institutions : 28  4.6 Determination of Curriculum : 29  4.7 Determination of Admission Policy  (For General, Professional & Self-Financing Courses) : 30  4.8 Determination of Intake Capacity  (For General, Professional & Self-Financing Courses) : 31  4.9 Authority for Determining of Fee Structure  (For General, Professional & Self-Financing Courses) : 32  4.10 Authority for Workload of Teachers : 33  4.11 Authority for Recruitment of Teaching Staff : 34  4.12 Authority for Determining Norms / Qualifications for Teaching Staff : 34  4.13 Authority for Conduct of Examinations and Award of Degrees  (For General, Professional & Self-Financing Courses) : 35  4.14 Degree of Existing Academic Autonomy : 36  4.15 Linking of Autonomy with Accreditation : 36  ix  4.16 Preference for Autonomy : 36  4.17 Autonomous Colleges : 37  4.18 Most Preferred Criteria for Determining the Quality of Institutions : 37  4.19 Authority for Determining Norms/Qualifications for Non-Teaching Staff : 38  4.20 Responses on Pertinent Aspects of Autonomy & Accountability : 39  4.21 Degree of Autonomy Exercised With Reference to Spending of  Funds Received from Various Organizations : 40  4.22 Financial Autonomy Delegated to Other Functionaries : 40  4.23 Response on the Hypothesis/Converse on Academic Autonomy : 41  4.24 Response on the Hypothesis/Converse on Student Admissions,  Discipline and Fees : 42  4.25 Response on the Hypothesis/Converse on Management Autonomy : 43  x  List of Annexures  Page No.  1 Resolution on Reconstitution of CABE : 76  2. Notification of Constitution of CABE Committee on Autonomy of  Higher Education Institutions : 83  3. Questionnaire : 85  4. Schedule of Regional Workshops : 96  5. a) List of Participants in Chennai Workshop : 97 b) List of Participants in Pune Workshop : 103 c) List of Participants in Guwahati Workshop : 107 d) List of Participants in Chandigarh Workshop : 113 e) List of Participants in the Interactive Sessions with AIFUCTO : 117  6. List of Central Universities : 118  7. List of Deemed Universities : 119  8. List of State Universities : 123  9. List of Private Universities : 130  10. List of Institutes of National Importance : 131  11. List of Institutes Established under State Legislature Act : 132  12. List of Degrees Specified by UGC : 133  xi  Abbreviations  AICTE : All India Council for Technical Education  AIFUCTO : All India Federation of University & College Teachers’ Organization  AIU : Association of Indian Universities  BCI : Bar Council of India  CABE : Central Advisory Board of Education  CCH : Central Council of Homeopathy  CCIM : Central Council of Indian Medicine  DCI : Dental Council of India  DEC : Distance Education Council  ETS : Educational Testing Services, Princeton, New Jersey  GATE : Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering  GATS : General Agreement on Trade in Services  GATT : General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade  GDP : Gross Domestic Product  ICAR : Indian Council of Agricultural Research  ICSSR : Indian Council of Social Science Research  ICT : Information and Communication Technologies  IGNOU : Indira Gandhi National Open University  INC : Indian Nursing Council  IPR : Intellectual Property Rights  IQAC : Internal Quality Assurance Cells  IT : Information Technology  M.Phil : Master of Philosophy  MCI : Medical Council of India  MHRD : Ministry of Human Resource Development  MoU : Memorandum of Understanding  NAAC : National Assessment and Accreditation Council  NBA : National Board of Accreditation  xii  NCTE : National Council for Teacher Education  NET : National Eligibility Test  NOC : No Objection Certificate  NPE : National Policy on Education  NTS : National Testing Services  OBC : Other Backward Classes  ODL : Open and Distance Learning  PCI : Pharmacy Council of India  PG : Postgraduate  Ph.D. : Doctor of Philosophy  PoA : Programme of Action  R&D : Research & Development  RCI : Rehabilitation Council of India  SC : Scheduled Castes  ST : Scheduled Tribes  ToR : Terms of Reference  UG : Undergraduate  UGC : University Grants Commission  UNESCO : United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization  UTs : Union Territories  WTO : World Trade Organization  xiii  Executive Summary  After the revival of the Central Advisory Board of Education (CABE) by the Government of India, amongst several committees set up by CABE to address specific concerns in education, one of the CABE committees was constituted on the subject of “Autonomy of Higher Education Institutions” under the chairmanship of Shri Kanti Biswas, Hon’ble Minister for Education, Government of West Bengal. The terms of reference of the Committee included:  (a) To suggest measures for enhancing the autonomy of higher education institutions,  especially those with potential for excellence.  (b) To institutionalize regulatory provisions for promoting autonomy and accountability of  higher education institutions.  The CABE Committee decided on a two-pronged strategy for eliciting views comments and observations from a large body of stakeholders of higher education and this included a Questionnaire and organization of four Regional Workshops, besides an exclusive interaction with representatives of All India Federation of University and College Teachers Organization (AIFUCTO). The questionnaire was dispatched to a large number of respondents associated with higher education, and this included Vice-Chancellors, Secretaries, Directors, Chairpersons of State Councils, Principals, etc. Besides, the questionnaire was also put on the website of the UGC to widen the catchment of responses from academics from all parts of the country.Based on the analysis of perceptions of the respondents to the Questionnaire a qualitative picture of what they feel on academic, financial and administrative autonomy has been summarized in Section 4.6 of Chapter 4. Various aspects dealing with academic, administrative and financial autonomy have been presented in Chapters 5, 6 & 7 in terms of their scope, basic concerns and major inferences based on the discussions that took place in workshops sessions. The recommendations have been grouped in terms of their implications. The grouping is to facilitate proper understanding and need not be seen as water tight compartmentalization of issues. Besides, it may be pertinent to mention here that during the course of deliberations the committee received a large number of suggestions. Many of these suggestions were not directly related to autonomy. However, for the sake of completeness, some of the important suggestions have been included in the list of recommendations. Some of the salient recommendations are outlined below :  Academic Matters  • There is a need to grant autonomy to individual institutions for designing curriculum. Universities may provide a broad framework within which individual faculty member both within the university and in the colleges should be encouraged to innovate and experiment to transform teaching and learning into a fascinating and rewarding experience.  • Each university should exercise innovative approaches in undertaking periodic revision of curriculum every two to three years and an intensive revision every four to five years depending on the developments in the subject area. Apex bodies like UGC, AICTE may evolve appropriate mechanisms of overseeing the quality of curricular changes envisaged by the institutions and provide feedback for improvement wherever required.  • Each institution should have the autonomy to design its own procedure for selection of research fellows with due regard to merit and also ensuring appropriate budgetary provisions for such purposes.  • In order to facilitate research in institutions of higher education funds should be made available to faculty member against duly worked out and approved research proposals. In return, the faculty  xiv  member should be accountable to maintain progress of research of acceptable standards as should be evidenced by publications in reputed journals.  • While ensuring that new frontier areas of knowledge are included in the curriculum, the institutions of higher education should also ensure that such an exercise does not simultaneously lead to precluding certain other subjects of vital concern such as environmental education, consumer education, human rights education, education in human values, population education, gender equality, disaster management and other related topics as a part of the undergraduate curriculum.  • The universities and colleges should focus equally on academic and job oriented programmes while planning for new programmes to make higher education relevant for the world of work.  • All universities and colleges should be given the autonomy to start self-financing courses particularly in new and emerging areas where job opportunities exist subject to the overall framework provided by their funding and regulatory bodies.  • All universities should shift towards adoption of a choice-based credit courses along with semester system within the minimum possible time. This would bring in flexibility in the academic structure besides promoting students’ mobility both within the country and abroad.  • All traditional universities should establish synergic linkages with open and distance education universities with a view to enhancing the enrolment in the higher education system but without compromising on their programmes offered in conventional face to face mode.  • Though the universities’ autonomy should aim at switching over to complete internal evaluation of students over a period of time with individual teacher having full autonomy in evaluation matters, there could be a mix of internal and external evaluation during the transition period depending on the circumstances prevailing in each university.  • Higher education institutions should focus on holistic development of an individual and, therefore, focus on development of multiple intelligence rather than merely linguistic and logical intelligence of an individual. The institutions should encourage students’ participation in various physical & cultural activities so that we build a nation of healthy individuals.  • Each higher education institution should set up an Internal Quality Assurance Cell with a view to continuously assessing its performance on objective and predefined parameters. Institutions should make their output performance public to ensure accountability.  • Institutions should be encouraged by the apex regulatory and statutory bodies to subject themselves for external accreditation periodically through advocacy and system of incentives and recognition.  • Colleges with A+ or A++ Accreditation and identified as College with Potential for Excellence may be granted status of an autonomous college without going through any other inspection procedure. Colleges with A++ Accreditation and identified as College with Potential for Excellence having strong post graduate programmes and good research profile could even be considered for grant of deemed to be university status. This would be an important step towards expanding the number of autonomous institutions with focus on quality and excellence.  • University Teaching Departments such as those that have been given the status of Centre of Advanced Studies (CAS) under Special Assistance Programme (SAP) of the UGC could be considered for grant of status of Autonomous Departments within the University set up.  • The selection committees should be so constituted that they are not subject to any bias and favour. The committees should adopt objective and transparent mechanism for selection. All universities  xv  should review their statutes and ordinances on the subject to ensure that under no circumstances, their committees are influenced by external pressures. Selection of faculty in all institutions of higher learning should be carried out on all-India basis to pick the best and the most meritorious teachers. Appointment of teachers on contract basis with a paltry amount may be disbanded.  • All universities should adopt the practice of performance appraisal of teachers initiated through self appraisal based on objective parameters.  • There is a strong need for improving the quality of the Orientation Programmes and Refresher Courses so that these result in actual development of professional competence of the faculty and not taken in a routine manner with the mere objective of facilitating promotion and career growth. Academic Staff Colleges should use high quality faculty, who could also act as role models and mentors as resource persons for their programmes.  • Individual institutions should be encouraged to apportion a part of their internal resources to fund participation of faculty for professional development programmes.  • In due course of time, it should be possible for the Government of India to establish a National Testing Service on the lines of Educational Testing Service of USA as envisaged in the National Policy on Education 1986.  • Higher education institutions may use a suitable combination of the scores obtained both in the entrance test and in the qualifying examination for admissions. A composite index may be evolved by way of giving proper weightage to other vital parameters such as academic performance in classes X and XII, extra-curricular activities, interview, etc.  • All higher education institutions need not focus on all areas of study. Universities across the nation and in different regions should provide a variety of programmes for the purpose of developing variegated manpower for the new and emerging realities of the region and the country.  • Universities should use the services of postgraduate and research students as research assistants and teaching assistants respectively in order to provide them with practical hands-on-experience and also to enable them to earn to meet their personal expenses.  • With a view to improving the quality of research in the country, use of international benchmarks such as citation indices, patents, should be encouraged and a national repository of doctoral theses created.  • Efforts should be made that academic calendars are synchronized at least for universities within a state so that students are not put to any inconvenience in the event of mobility from one university to another, if the need so arises.  • Higher education institutions should be encouraged and facilitated to put in place institutional mechanisms and infrastructure and facilities for attracting international students and to enter into collaborative arrangements with their counterparts abroad.  Administrative Matters  • Acts, statutes and ordinances of the universities should be reviewed for their better management as also for granting autonomous status to affiliating colleges. The new form of management in the university should encourage speedy decision making, networking, team effort and collective responsibility to meet the challenges of the new millennium.  • The present system of assigning fixed number of positions of Professors, Readers & Lecturers to  xvi  each department should be replaced by a system wherein the head of the institution should have the autonomy to determine both the rank and the number of these positions in accordance with the tasks envisaged in the development plan of the institution.  • All bodies and authorities in the universities and colleges should have representatives from the concerned stakeholders with an appropriate mix of elected and nominated representatives from amongst academia.  • The selection of Vice-Chancellors of the universities should be done with utmost care through a search-cum-selection procedure.  • To the extent possible various non-academic activities could be outsourced to achieve better efficiency and greater effectiveness reducing the overall burden of administering institution. The institutions should strive to achieve a ratio of 1:1.5 to 2.0 between the teaching and non-teaching staff including both technical and academic support staff.  • Central & State Higher Education Tribunals be set up for expeditious disposal of litigations on service matters relating to both academic and non-academic staff in the higher education system.  • Each university may set up grievance redressal mechanism to ensure that grievances of the students, both academic and non-academic are addressed in an expeditious manner.  • There is a need for taking up coordinated efforts for training and development of academic administrators in the higher education institutions with a view to improving the quality of governance.  • Institutions should be allowed to fill up all posts expeditiously in a time bound manner.  • Many affiliating state universities have very large number of affiliated colleges. In certain cases universities find it difficult to manage them effectively. Therefore, there is a need for a review with a view to looking up for feasible solutions.  • The Universities need to review and simplify their guidelines for grant of affiliation both temporary and permanent with a view to ensuring better governance of affiliated colleges.  • The power of affiliation and de-affiliation should entirely be vested in the university concerned.  • Academic structures within the university system should facilitate teaching and research in interdisciplinary and multi-disciplinary areas. Obstacles and bottlenecks which exist in the existing academic structures should be removed.  Financial Matters  • One-third of entire investment in education sector should be made on higher education.  • Not all government and government aided universities and colleges are provided financial support by the UGC. There is a need for bringing all of them within the purview of financial support of UGC by significantly increasing its present level of allocation.  • Since full public financing of higher education to manage growth and diversity within the context of overall funds constraints is no longer possible, universities and colleges have to search for alternate funding sources.  • Funding to individual institutions should be provided on block grant pattern so that they have greater degree of freedom to set up their own priority.  xvii  • Higher education institutions should be encouraged and facilitated to generate internal resources. The scheme for promoting internal generation should be made more broad based and be re-designed so as to provide financial incentives for overall performance of the institution against objectively defined parameters that may be captured through the performance radars mechanism. The internal resources generated by an institution under no circumstances should be adjusted with any other grants and institutions should be allowed to use it exclusively for developmental purposes.  • The Central Government and the State Governments or their authorized agencies as the case may be could be empowered to set ceilings on fee levels. All institutions should be required to adopt certain disclosure standards with a view to containing malpractice in relation to fees.  • All institutions should have the provision to provide free-ships and scholarships to meritorious and deserving students coming from lower socio-economic strata of the society.  • The practice of financial disclosure standards should be introduced in self-financing institutions with a view to bringing greater level of transparency in their financial management.  • The audit systems including system of internal audit should be strengthened with a view to ensuring proper expenditure management and compliance of financial rules and regulations.  • Higher education institutions should be given complete autonomy to undertake consultancy assignments and sponsored research projects.  • The user ministries and departments of the Government of India and of the State governments, particularly those related to science & technology should also contribute to development and growth of higher education system.  General  • The functioning of the UGC needs to be reviewed in the light of changing realities to make it more effective for maintenance of standards.  • There is a need for evolving a coordination mechanism between the UGC and the various professional Councils.  • All higher education institutions need to be given full autonomy to establish linkages for academic and research collaboration with their counterpart academic and research institutions, industry and professional organizations both in India and abroad.  • There is a strong need for developing effective synergies between research in the universities and their application in and utilization by the industry to the mutual advantage of both the systems. Likewise industry should be persuaded to establish organic linkages with the universities to seek solutions of problems faced by the industry.  • There is a need for making organized efforts and enhance the level of funding support for deployment of new technologies for ensuring quality education for all and promote excellence. New technologies have potential to change the teaching-learning paradigm in a way that has not been possible before.  • There is a need to encourage private participation with adequate social control in higher education with a view to enhancing access by increasing capacity, supplement government funding and make higher education closer to the job market.  • There should be a charter of responsibility and devolution and delegation of authority defined for different levels within the university system and both should be monitored together.  xviii  • A code of professional ethics should be developed by professional national level teachers’ organization in consultation with institutions of higher education and mechanism evolved for ensuring its observance.  • Norms of Accountability which must be open, participative and data based should be developed by Higher Education Institutions in consultation with the faculty.  • The Government of India may finalize its recommendations in regard to General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) in consultation with UGC and other statutory bodies dealing with professional and technical education.  Concerned authorities are expected to pay due attention to examine the aforesaid recommendations and initiate appropriate steps for their timely implementation.  xix  Chapter 1  The Contextual Framework of the Committee  1.1 Central Advisory Board of Education (CABE)  The CABE was set up in 1921 to enable the Central Government to play an effective role in education, based on consensus among the representatives of the then provincial governments. However, for reasons which need not be elaborated here, the operation of CABE was kept in abeyance till it was revived in 1935 after a gap of 14 years of its establishment. It was to meet once every year and was to function through its Committees. The CABE met 50 times between 1935 and 1994. Practically all important matters concerning education till 1994 were debated in the CABE and a national consensus was reached. The CABE remained dormant for almost a decade since 1994, and it is only in 2004 that this important body in the field of education has been revived by the Government of India.  It is important to appreciate the role of the CABE, particularly because of its revival after a gap of about a decade. Decisions of the Union Government relating to education are enforceable only if they are taken in pursuance of central legislation, as for example, the unquestioned acceptability of the decisions taken by the statutory bodies set up by the Government of India covering various aspects of higher education. Other decisions by the Union Government have little sanctity unless they are based on consensus. The CABE provides a forum for sharing and consensus building on national issues in education among the States. The Education Commission (1964-66) refers to the CABE as the most important advisory body in the field of education. The National Policy on Education (NPE) 1986 (with modifications undertaken in 1992) states that “ the CABE will play a pivotal role in reviewing educational development, determining the changes required to improve the system and monitoring implementation”.  Recalling the pre-independence era, matters of far-reaching importance considered by the CABE pertain to various educational issues. In 1938, the CABE set up a Committee on the Wardha Education Scheme ( Nai Taleem of Mahatma Gandhi). The Committee went into great detail in working out modalities for the implementation of the Nai Taleem and recommended it for adoption by all provincial governments at that time. This was reiterated by the CABE Committee on “Post-War Plan for Educational Development in India” (1944), also known as Sargent Plan. This was a Plan for Indianisation of education, to universalize primary education, and to improve quality of education so that our education system became comparable with that of the industrialized nations.  The CABE secured a national consensus on the structure of education namely the ‘10+2+3 pattern’, made recommendation towards establishment of ‘Common School System’ as the bedrock of educational quality, social cohesion and national integration calling for moving towards a common admission policy, tuition-free school  1  education, parity among all the teachers, involvement of the community and adoption of the concept of ‘neighbourhood school’ to eliminate segregation. Unfortunately, this stipulation has remained unimplemented despite its inclusion in the NPE (1968, 1986, 1992).  The crucial role of the CABE has been in the area of school curriculum and related matters, and amongst the significant recommendations made by it may be mentioned the three language formula, issues related to curriculum and the examination system with a focus on internal evaluation, grading, provision of testing service, etc. The CABE Committees on the question of values, national and emotional integration, and assessment of textbooks to be built on scientific and secular outlook also made significant recommendations. The latest of CABE’s contribution relate to the approval of the National Curriculum Framework of 1975 and 1988 for school education in India.  In the field of higher education, the CABE has played an important role in analyzing the report of the University Grants Commission (UGC) Committee ‘Towards New Educational Management’ (Gnanam Committee) 1992.  The CABE has, therefore, been an effective instrument of appreciation of cohesion of different views, ideological standpoints and academic perspectives on policy issues in education. It is a significant decision of the Government of India that the Board has now been reconstituted to perform the onerous role in the context of the educational development of the country.  1.2 CABE Committee on Autonomy of Higher Education Institutions  The Government of India reconstituted the CABE vide resolution dated 6th July 2004 (Annexure 1). The first meeting of the reconstituted CABE was held on 10th–11th August 2004 during which some critical issues had emerged needing detailed discussions. While concluding the deleberations of the two-day meet of the reconstituted CABE, the Hon’ble Minister for Human Resource Development, Government of India, Shri Arjun Singh referred to the tradition of CABE of identifying key issues for detailed deliberatins. Subsequently, he suggested setting up of seven different committees of CABE to deal with crucial issues encompassing different sectors of education:  1. Free and Compulsory Education Bill and other issues related to Elementary Education.  2. Girls’ Education and the Common School System.  3. Universlisation of Secondary Education.  4. Autonomy of Higher Education Institutions.  5. Integration of Culture Education in the School Curriculum.  6. Regulatory Mechanism for the Text books and parallel text books taught in schools out side the  Government system.  7. Financial of Higher and Technical Education.  Accordingly, the Ministry of Human Resource Development set up, among others, a Committee of the CABE vide Notification No. 2-16/2004-PN-I dated 8th September 2004 (Annexure 2) on the subject of ‘Autonomy of Higher Education Institutions’ under the Chairmanship of Shri Kanti Biswas, Hon’ble Minister for Education, Government of West Bengal, with the following composition:  2  1. Shri Kanti Biswas Chairman  Hon’ble Minister for Education Government of West Bengal, Kolkata 2. Dr. Shurhozelie Member  Hon’ble Minister for Education Government of Nagaland, Kohima 3. Shri D. Manjunath Member  Hon’ble Minister for Education Government of Karnataka, Bangalore 4. Shri Ajay Chandrakar Member  Hon’ble Minister for Education Government of Chattisgarh, Raipur 5. Prof. P.V. Indiresan Member  Former Director, Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai 6. Prof. Andre Beteille Member  Chairman, ICSSR New Delhi 7. Chairman Member  University Grants Commission 8. Chairman Member  All India Council for Technical Education AICTE 9. Prof. Gopal Guru Member  Professor, Department of Political Science Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi 10. Prof. Ved Prakash Member Secretary  Secretary, UGC  Co-opted Members  1. Dr. M. Anandakrishnan Former Vice-Chairman Tamil Nadu State Council of Higher Education, Chennai 2. Dr. A. Gnanam  Former Vice-Chancellor Pondicherry University, Pondicherry 3. Prof. (Mrs.) K. Sudha Rao  Vice-Chancellor Karnataka State Open University, Mysore 4. Dr. (Mrs.) Renu Batra  Joint Secretary, UGC  3  The Terms of Reference (ToR) of the Committee were:  (a) To suggest measures for enhancing the autonomy of higher education institutions, especially  those with potential for excellence. (b) To institutionalize regulatory provisions for promoting autonomy and accountability of higher  education institutions.  The Committee was expected to give its recommendations within six months from the date of its constitution.  The ToR (a) is interpreted to refer to enhancing autonomy of all higher education institutions. However, the special reference to those with potential for excellence is to qualify that such institutions as have already made a mark in excellence in the specific area of their work need to be taken note of and provided autonomy which can enable them to move faster towards still higher goals of achievements in the areas of their professional concerns.  1.3 Approach to the Task  The CABE Committee decided to adopt a two-pronged strategy for the purpose of soliciting views, comments and observations from a larger body of stakeholders of higher education and this included design of a structured Questionnaire (Annexure-3) and organization of four Regional Workshops (Annexure-4), besides a meeting with the representatives of All India Federation of University and College Teachers’ Organization (AIFUCTO).  Questionnaire  The Questionnaire included a general section eliciting the profile and the type of category of the institution as well as the length of its establishment. It was divided into three parts. Part A of the Questionnaire which dealt with Academic, Administrative and Financial Autonomy of institutions included information pertaining to curriculum, admissions, fees, workload of teachers, recruitment of teaching and non-teaching staff, examination, accreditation, affiliation, etc. Part B of the Questionnaire included questions arranged in pairs – a hypothesis and its converse; the respondents were to agree with one or the other but not with both. The items in this category were in three areas, namely, (i) academic autonomy, (ii) student admissions, discipline and fees and (iii) management autonomy. Part C of the Questionnaire was deliberately kept open-ended so that the respondents could share their views on issues not covered in Part A and Part B or on issues on which they wanted to express their views in greater detail.  The Questionnaire was dispatched to a fairly large number of respondents and this included the ViceChancellors/Directors of all Degree awarding Institutions/Universities, Secretaries of States/Union Territories (UTs), Directors of Higher Education of States/UTs, Chairpersons of the State Councils of Higher Education, Principals of Autonomous Colleges, Principals of Affiliated Colleges/University Colleges including Colleges under section 2(f) & 12B of the UGC Act. The Questionnaire was also put on the website of the UGC to widen the catchment of responses from academics from all parts of the country.  The responses received from different categories of respondents have been analyzed with reference to different parameters of autonomy and are presented in Chapter 4 of the Report.  Regional Workshops  The CABE Committee on ‘Autonomy of Higher Education Institutions’ organized four Regional  4  Workshops and a meeting with the representatives of AIFUCTO with a view to involving various stakeholders stated above in a participatory discussion. The details of these workshops and meetings are given in Table 1.1.  Table 1.1 : Regional Workshops Organized  S.No. Name of the Date & Venue Statues/UTs covered  Workshop  1. Southern Regional 30th November & 1st December, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Workshop 2004 at University of Madras, Kerala, Tamil Nadu,  Chennai Lakshadweep, Pondicherry  2. Western Regional 8th & 9th December, 2004 at Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Madhya  Workshop University of Pune, Pradesh, Maharashtra, Dadra  Pune Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu  3. Eastern & North Eastern 28th and 29th December, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar,  Regional Workshop 2004 at Assam Administrative Jharkhand, Manipur, Meghalaya,  Staff College, Guwahati Mizoram, Nagaland, Orissa,  Sikkim, Tripura, West Bengal, Andaman & Nicobar Islands  4. Northern Regional Workshop 20th & 21st January, 2005 at Delhi, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,  Panjab University, Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab, Chandigarh Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh,  Uttaranchal, Chandigarh  5. Meeting with AIFUCTO 8th February, 2005 at Representatives of AIFUCTO  UGC Headquarters, New Delhi  A large number of academics, administrators and other stakeholders participated in the aforesaid workshops. The list of participants who attended these workshops and meeting are given at (Annexures – 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, and 5e).  1.4 Format of the Report  As a result of the deliberations in the four Regional Workshops and a meeting with AIFUCTO representatives and analyses of the responses to the Questionnaire as well as several rounds of discussions of the CABE Committee, the report is chapterized as follows:  • The contextual Framework of the Committee  • Higher Education in India – An Overview  • Autonomy and Accountability of Higher Education Institutions : A Conceptual Framework  • Perceptions of Stake Holders on Autonomy of Higher Education Institutions  • Academic Autonomy  • Administrative Autonomy  • Financial Autonomy  • Recommendations  • Salient Recommendations and Strategies for Implementation  Each of these areas is presented in the Chapters that follow. The contents of the Chapters are based on the deliberations of the CABE Committee, response to the Questionnaire, outcomes of the Regional Workshops and the meeting with AIFUCTO representatives.  5  Chapter 2  Higher Education in India – An Overview  2.1 Higher Education Institutions  The institutions of higher learning in India fall into the following broad categories:  a) Universities: These are established by an Act of Parliament or State Legislature and are of unitary or affiliating type. They are called Central Universities and State Universities respectively.  b) Deemed to be Universities: These institutions are given deemed to be university status by the Central Government on the recommendation of the UGC in terms of Section 3 of the UGC Act. Some of these institutions offer advanced level courses in a particular field or specialization while others award general degrees.  c) Private Universities: These are established by various State governments through their own  legislation.  d) Institutes of National Importance : These Institutes are declared as such by the Government of India by an Act of Parliament and are empowered to award degrees. In some cases, such Institutes are also set up by the Government through an Act of State Legislation.  e) Premier Institutes of Management : These are the Institutes that have been set up by the Central Government and are outside the formal university system. They offer Post-Graduate Diploma Programmes which are equivalent to Master’s Degree Programmes in area of management.  The State/UT-wise list of all the Central Universities, Deemed to be Universities, recognized State Universities, UGC recognized Private universities, Institutes of National importance and Institutions established under State Legislation Acts are given in Annexures 6 to 11 respectively.  There has been an upsurge in the demand for higher education after independence of the country in 1947, and a virtual explosion in the number of universities and colleges. India has now a system of higher education with 343 degree awarding institutions. The growth of the institutions, category-wise, is given in Table 2.1. This and the data in the subsequent Tables included in this chapter are based on the UGC’s Annual Reports.  The universities are of various kinds; with a single faculty or multi-faculties; teaching or affiliating or teaching-cum-affiliating; one campus or multi-campus; Sanskrit Universities; Technological Universities; Agricultural Universities; Medical Universities; Women’s Universities; Special Institutes of Medicine, Science, Law, Engineering and Technology, Management and Social Work, etc.  6  Table 2.1 : Number of Higher Education Institutions  Year Central State Deemed to be Institutes of Private Total  Universities Universities Universities National Universities  Importance*  1950-51 3 24 27  1960-61 4 41 2 2 49  1970-71 5 79 9 9 102  1980-81 7 105 11 9 132  1990-91 10 137 29 9 185  As on 18 205 95 18 7 343 27.04.2005  * Includes five Institutes established through State Legislature Acts  2.2 Colleges  Most colleges in India are affiliated to universities and provide undergraduate education. Some colleges also undertake post-graduate teaching and research. The affiliating universities oversee the standards of the affiliated colleges and hold examinations and award degrees to successful candidates.  The college sector is managed both by the Government and Private bodies. Colleges are affiliated to a university and follow the curriculum and examination pattern determined by it. Further, there are some constituent colleges which are established and managed by a particular university.  Similar to that of universities, the growth of the number of colleges has also increased manifold. In 195051, there were only 578 colleges, whereas the current tally of affiliated and university colleges stands at 16,885.  Table 2.2 : Number of General and Professional Colleges  Year General & Professional Colleges 1950-51 578 1960-61 1,819 1970-71 3,277 1980-81 4,738 1990-91 5,748 2001-02 11,146 2003-04 16,885  2.3 Autonomous Colleges  The Education Commission (1964-66) pointed out that the exercise of academic freedom by teachers is a crucial requirement to the development of the intellectual climate of our country. Unless such a climate prevails, it is difficult to achieve excellence in our higher education system. As students, teachers and managements are co-partners in raising the quality of higher education, it is imperative that they share a major responsibility towards this end and hence the Education Commission recommended college autonomy, which,  7  in essence, is the instrument for promoting academic excellence. Consequently, it was decided to confer autonomous status to such institutions as have the capability to design their own curriculum, evolve innovative teaching and testing strategies.  The UGC, on the recommendation of an Expert Committee and in consultation with the State Government and the University concerned, confers the autonomous status on colleges to enable them to determine their own curricula, rules for admission, evolve methods of assessment of student work, conduct of examination, use modern tools of educational technology and promote healthy practices such as community service, extension activities for the benefit of the society at large. There are at present 204 autonomous colleges spanning over 11 States and 43 Universities.  2.4 Enrolments  A large number of young people enter higher education with a view to obtaining Degrees, necessary for entering into a growing number of jobs. As against the total enrolment of 200,000 students in the year 1950, the present enrolment has risen to 9,953,506, out of which 86.97% are enrolled in Colleges in pursuit of undergraduate, postgraduate, research and diplomas, whereas only 13.03% are enrolled in the universities. A detailed stage-wise students’ enrolment is given in Table 2.3.  Table 2.3 : Stage-wise Enrolment of Students  S.No. Stage University Affiliated Total Percentage Department/ Colleges (% to Grand in Affiliated University Total) Colleges  College  1 Graduate 864,335 8,003,043 8,867,378  (89.09%) 90.25  2 Post-Graduate 315,503 598,229 913,732  (9.18%) 65.47  3 Research 58,321 7,170 65,491  (0.66%) 10.95  4 Diploma/ 58,761 48,144 106,905  Certificate (1.07%) 45.03  Grand Total 1,296,920 8,656,586 9,953,506 86.97  (100%)  8  Of the total enrolment, 45.12% of the students are pursuing their degrees in Arts, 20.44% in Science and 17.99% in Commerce and Management. The remaining 17% students are in the professional education. A detailed break-up of enrolment pattern is given in Table 2.4.  As regards the enrolment of relevant age group in higher education, we have achieved a rate of 6.86% compared to 1.5% in 1961. However, this rate is very low in comparison to other developing and developed countries. A detailed break-up of the participation of relevant age group is given in Table 2.5.  2.5 Strength of Faculty  Universities and colleges have similar, though not identical, structure and ranks in the academic profession. Universities have Lecturers, Readers and Professors. The position of Associate Professor also exists in some universities. In the colleges, the bulk of the faculty is in the substantive posts of lecturers. There are higher grades such as senior grade lecturer and selection grade lecturer. The latter is equivalent in salary to that of a Reader but without the title. The rank of Assistant Professor also exists in some States.  Though recruitment of faculty is done by individual institutions as per their rules/statutes, the minimum qualification and pay scale for different posts are prescribed by the UGC in case of general institutions, and by other regulatory bodies such as the AICTE/Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), etc. for professional institutions.  Table 2.4 : Faculty-wise Enrolment of Students  S. No Faculty Total Enrolment Percentage to Total  1 Arts 4,490,723 45.12  2 Science 2,035,059 20.44  3 Commerce / Management 1.790,636 17.99  4 Engineering / Technology 716,652 7.20  5 Medicine 313,489 3.15  6 Law 303,629 3.05  7 Education 146,039 1.47  8 Others 83,721 0.84  9 Agriculture 58,700 0.59  10 Veterinary Sciences 14,858 0.15  Grand Total 9,953,506 100.00  Table 2.5 : Percentage of Enrolment of Relevant Age Group in Higher Education  Year 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2004  Percentage 1.5 4.2 4.7 5.9 6.0 6.86  9  Approximately, there is ten-fold increase in the faculty strength from 40,000 in 1950 to 456,742 in 200304. Detailed break-up of teachers in Universities and Colleges is given in Table 2.6.  Note : a) Figures in parentheses indicate the percentage of the cadres to the total staff.  b) Part-time teachers / Physical Training Instructors are included in Lecturers.  2.6 Degree Award Structure  There are four principal levels of qualifications within the higher education system in the country, namely:  Diploma courses: These are available at the undergraduate and postgraduate levels. At the undergraduate level, their duration varies from one to three years; postgraduate diplomas are normally awarded after two years’ study.  Bachelors /Undergraduate Degrees in Arts, Commerce and Sciences: These require three years of education (after 12 years of school education). In some places there are honours and special courses also available which are not necessarily longer in duration but indicate greater depth of study. Bachelor degree in professional field of study in agriculture, dentistry, engineering, pharmacy, technology and veterinary medicine generally take four years, while for architecture and medicine, it takes five to five and a half years respectively. There are other Bachelor degrees, for example, in education, journalism and library science that are treated second degrees. Bachelor’s degree in law can either be taken as an integrated degree course of five year duration or three-year course as a second degree.  Master’s Degree Programmes: Master’s Degree is normally of two-year duration. It could be coursework based without thesis or based on research alone. In case of postgraduate programmes of some institutions in the area of engineering and technology admission is done on the basis of Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering (GATE).Pre-Doctoral/Doctoral Programmse: These are taken after completion of Master’s Degree and may lead to M.Phil or Ph.D degree. This can either be completely research based or can include course work as well. Ph.D. is awarded two years after M.Phil. or three years after Master’s Degree. Students are expected to write a substantial thesis based on original research.  UGC has specified as many as 144 Degrees; a list of specified Degrees is given in Annexure 12.  Table 2.6: Faculty in Universities and Colleges  Year Professors Readers Senior Lecturers Tutors / Total  Lecturers Demonstrators  2003-04 39,745 111,274 70,341 218,713 16,669 456,742  (8.70) (24.36) (15.40) (47.89) (3.65) (100.00)  10  2.7 Statutory Bodies in Higher Education  Education is on the ‘concurrent list’ subject to Entry 66 in the Union List of the Constitution. This gives exclusive Legislative Power to the Central Government for co-ordination and determination of standards in institutions of higher education or research, and scientific and technical institutions. The coordination and cooperation between the Union and the States is brought about in the field of education through the CABE. The Union Government is responsible for major policies relating to higher education in the country. In discharging its responsibility, it has established the following regulatory and statutory bodies. A list of such bodies and their mandates are given in Table 2.7.  11  Table 2.7 : Regulatory and Statutory Bodies in Higher Education  S.No. Name of the Body Mandate  1 University Grants Commission • Co-ordination, determination and maintenance of  standards in higher education.  • Release of grants to individual institutions  2 All India Council for Technical Education • Proper planning & co-ordinated development of technical  education system throughout the country.  3 Distance Education Council • Promotion of Open University and Distance Education systems in the educational pattern of the country and for coordination and determination of standards of teaching, evaluation & research in such systems  4 Indian Council of Agricultural Research • Co-ordination of agricultural research and development programmes and develop linkages at national and international levels with related organisations to enhance the quality of life of the farming community.  5 Bar Council of India • Co-ordination, determination and maintenance of  standards in legal education and profession.  6 National Council for Teacher Education • Achieving planned and co-ordinated development of the teacher education system throughout the country, the regulation and proper maintenance of norms and standards in teacher education and for matters connected therewith.  7 Rehabilitation Council of India • Standardization and regulation of training of personnel and professionals in the field of Rehabilitation and Special Education.  8 Medical Council of India • Establishment of standards in medical education and to  define medical qualifications in India and abroad.  9 Pharmacy Council of India • Prescription, regulation and maintenance of minimum educational standards for the training of pharmacists uniformly in the country.  10 Indian Nursing Council • Regulation and maintenance of uniform standards of training for Nurses, Midwives, Auxilliary NurseMidwives and Health Visitors  11 Dental Council of India • Regulation of the Dental Education, Dental Profession, Dental ethics in the country and recommend to the Government of India to accord permission to start a Dental College, start higher courses and increase of seats.  12 Central Council of Homeopathy • Maintenance of the Central Register of Homoeopathy.  13 Central Council of Indian Medicine • Maintenance of the Central Register of Indian Medicine  12  2.8 State Councils of Higher Education  In pursuance of the National Policy on Education (NPE) 1986/1992, the States were required to set up State Councils of Higher Education for the purpose of providing an effective platform for planning and coordination of higher education in the State. These Councils were primarily aimed at bringing about qualitative improvement in higher education. The following States have set up Council/Advisory Boards for higher education:  1. Andhra Pradesh State Council for Higher Education, Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad 2. State Advisory Board for Higher Education & Culture, Himachal Pradesh, Shimla 3. Uttar Pradesh State Council of Higher Education, Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow 4. Tamil Nadu State Council for Higher Education, Tamil Nadu, Chennai 5. West Bengal State Council for Higher Education, West Bengal, Kolkata 6. State Advisory Board for Higher Education, Tripura, Agartala 7. State Advisory Board for Higher Education, Arunachal Pradesh, Itanagar  2.9 Norms and Standards in Higher Education  The system of higher education, like any other system, requires performance evaluation, assessment and accreditation of universities and colleges in the country. In this connection, the UGC under section 12(ccc) established National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) in 1994. The philosophy of NAAC is based on objective and continuous improvement rather than being punitive or judgemental so that all institutions of higher education are empowered to maximize their resources, opportunities and capabilities. Assessment is accomplished through a process of self-study and peer review using defined criteria. The main purpose of assessment and accreditation is improvement and enhancement of quality, recognizing excellence, accountability, information providing and benchmarking. The process is aimed at strengthening and sustaining the quality and credibility of higher education making it worthy of public confidence and minimizing the scope of external control. The assessment is mainly based on seven major criteria such as the following:  • Curricular Aspects  • Teaching – Learning and Evaluation  • Research, Consultancy and Extension  • Infrastructure and Learning Resources  • Student Support and Progression  • Organization and Management  • Healthy and Innovative Practices  NAAC has completed the process of assessment and accreditation of 117 universities and 2,396 colleges till February 2005. More institutions are under assessment and accreditation. The accredited institutions are rated on a 9-point scale ranging from A++ to C supplemented by a qualitative report that highlights the strengths and weaknesses of the institution.  13  2.10 Open and Distance Learning in Higher Education  Providing cost-effective quality education to large sections of our population, including those living in remote and far-flung areas is a cardinal step towards democratizing higher education. The task has become all the more challenging with the developments that have taken place in the area of information and communication technologies (ICT). Started in this country as correspondence education, the modality has now come of age in the development of Open and Distance Learning (ODL). Besides the establishment of Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) in 1985, we have now 11 State Open Universities working in close collaboration with IGNOU. These institutions offer various academic programmes that lead to certificates, diplomas and degrees. In its capacity as an apex body, IGNOU coordinates and monitors distance education system in higher education throughout the country. It has constituted a statutory Distance Education Council (DEC) and provides expertise and assistance to other open and distance learning institutions in the country. Approximately 22% of the enrolment in higher education can safely be attributed to be covered under distance education programmes.  The general academic programmes offered by ODL institutions include:  • Doctoral Programmes  • Bachelor’s Degree and Master’s Degree Programmes  • Computer and Library & Information Sciences  • Journalism, Communication and Creative Writing  • Health, Nutrition and Child Care  • Engineering & Rural Development  • Education & Distance Education  • Management & Tourism Studies  • Women and Youth Development  • Area Specific Awareness & Manpower Development Programmes  2.11 Private Initiatives in Higher Education  A number of developments have taken place regarding private initiatives in higher education which have implications for re-thinking on some vital concerns. Amongst the notable points in this regard are mentioned the following:  • Establishment of private universities by various governments through their own legislation which vary from State to State and also within the State.  • Establishment of Deemed to be Universities including de-novo category, involving particularly private institutions imparting technical, medical and other professional education.  • Conceptualization of virtual universities for entry of foreign universities in different kinds of collaboration.  The Government of India had initiated Private Universities (Establishment and Regulation) Bill 1995 which has remained under consideration so far. However, some States in the recent past have come up with the Private  14  University Act and as a result of that they have set up private universities. As per the latest information, the number of private universities in existence in various States is given in Table 2.8  It may be pertinent to mention that in the year 2002, the State of Chattisgarh enacted the Chattisgarh Niji Kshetra Vishwavidyalaya [Sthapna Aur Viniyaman] Adhiniyam, 2002. Section 5 of the said Adhiniyam provides that the State government may by notification in the gazette establish a university by such name and with such jurisdiction and location of campus as may be specified therein. The State of Chattisgarh, in exercise of its power conferred in the said section of the Adhiniyam, initially permitted for the establishment of 108 universities, out of which the State government issued viability certificates for the establishment of 97 universities. Based on an amendment to the above said Act in 2004, the State of Chattisgarh denotified 60 universites out of 97. Two Public Interest Litigations were filed in the Hon’ble Supreme Court challenging the establishment of these universities. The Hon’ble Court struck down provisions of Sections 5 and 6 of the aforesaid Act while declaring the same to be ultra vires. Consequently, all such universities have ceased to exist.  2.12 Trans-National Higher Education  The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) came into existence in 1947 to manage international trade through multilateral trade agreements. India was one of the 23 founder members of the GATT. In the last round of discussions in 1994, the member countries decided to replace GATT by World Trade Organization (WTO) and accordingly signed an agreement on 1st January 1995. With the increasing importance of service sector in the world economy, the member countries of WTO in 1996 agreed to sign a General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) which covered services of international trade at par with merchandise trade. This agreement in general covers all the services (presently specified 19 services) including education services. The WTO has identified four different modes of trade in education that received legal protection through GATS :  • Cross-Border Supply of a service includes any type of course that is provided through distance education or the internet, any type of testing service, and educational materials which can cross national boundaries.  • Consumption Abroad mainly involves the education of foreign students and is the most common form of trade in educational services.  • Commercial Presence refers to the actual presence of foreign investors in a host country. This would include foreign universities setting up courses or entire institutions in another country.  • Presence of Natural Persons refers to the ability of people to move between countries to provide educational services.  2.8 : Number of Private Universities  State No. of Private Universities Uttaranchal 02 Gujarat 02 Uttar Pradesh 02 Himachal Pradesh 01  Total 07  15  In India, the export of Higher Education by Universities in several countries is taking place in four different modes namely, Consumption Abroad, Cross Border Supply, Twinning Programme, Virtual University.  According to one of the compilations, the total number of international students in the year 2002 was about 1.8 million. This number is likely to grow to 7.2 million by 2025. Interestingly, more than half of the students would be from Asian countries. The United States of America (USA) topped the list in attracting over 582,000 international students in the year 2001-02 followed by Great Britain with 200,000. Other countries like Germany, France and Australia attract over 100,000 international students a year. According to the figures of Association of Indian Universites (AIU), the number of foreign students in India went down from 13,707 in 1993-94 to 7,791 in 200001. A majority of these students are from the neighbouring countries like Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Mauritius, Nepal, Bhutan, etc.  A rough estimate has shown that as many as 50,000 students are enrolled for studies abroad. Government of India through AICTE has brought out regulations for entry and operation of foreign universities in India. The Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD), Government of India, has also come up with a draft policy paper for the purpose of regulating the operation of foreign educational institutions in the country and promoting Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in the education sector. The committee constituted for the purpose has outlined the salient features of this policy framework that include quality assurance as an integral part. The policy framework notes that operation of foreign educational institutions should not have deleterious effect on Indian culture and ethos and shall be open for practitioners of all religions. There shall be mandatory registration of foreign education service providers with a registering authority. Institutions and programmes offered by them should be accredited in their own countries and their awards recognized as equivalent to the awards given for their own campus programmes. They shall maintain minimum standards as laid down by the concerned agency and will be subject to external quality review by a designated agency. Following this, the MHRD issued a directive in September 2003 to bring all the foreign educational institutions operating in India within the assessment and accreditation process of NAAC.  Quality Assurance & Accreditation Framework  In pursuance of the policy of the MHRD, the committee on International Accreditation constituted by NAAC has developed the quality assurance and accreditation framework. According to this, accreditation should be made mandatory for all foreign universities operating in India and the credentials and profile of these universities including infrastructure, learning process, fee structure and faculty profile, etc be brought to the notice of the general public.  It is amply clear now that if a foreign institution fails to comply with any of the conditions as contained in AICTE regulations and or consistently refrain from taking corrective action contrary to the advice of AICTE, the AICTE may after giving reasonable opportunity, withdraw the registration granted to such an institution. AICTE shall also inform the concerned agencies, including Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, and Ministry of Finance of such decisions and advise these agencies to take appropriate measures against the erring institutions.  16  Chapter 3  Autonomy And Accountability of Higher Education Institutions A Conceptual Framework  Generic to the deliberations of the CABE Committee is the elaboration of the conceptual framework of Autonomy and Accountability of Higher Education Institutions. This was the foremost area of discussion by the CABE Committee since the question of autonomy and accountability has to be spelt out against this conceptual backdrop.  3.1 History of Efforts Towards Autonomy  In the first half of the nineteenth century, prior to the establishment of the first set of Indian Universities, several colleges came into existence with full autonomy such as Hindu College, Calcutta (1817), Agra College (1827), Poona College (1833), Elphinstone College, Bombay (1834), Hoogly College (1836), Patna College (1840), St. Joseph College, Nagapattinam (1844), Hislop College, Nagpur (1844), Bethune College for Women, Calcutta (1849), Madras Christian College (1852), and St. John’s College (1853). With the establishment of the first three Universities in Calcutta, Bombay and Madras, twenty-seven existing autonomous colleges were affiliated in 1857 to these three universities, when rules were adopted for common admission, courses, examination and results.  The attempt to revive the concept of college autonomy was made in Uttar Pradesh Legislature by way of Agra University Amendment Act. However, this provision was not given effect to by the university. The Committee on Colleges under the chairmanship of Prof. Mahajani in 1964 advised UGC on a general policy to be followed in development of colleges.  The Committee on Standards of University Education under the Chairmanship of Prof. S.K.Sidhanta (1965) emphasized the need for introducing autonomy. The first formal and specific recommendations on college autonomy appeared in the Report of the Education Commission (1964-66) under the chairmanship of Prof. D.S.Kothari.  Since 1968 when the first National Policy on Education based on Kothari Commission report was adopted, there have been continued emphasis on changing the affiliation system of colleges. The affiliation system which persisted since 1857 worked well during the early decades when the number of colleges affiliated to the universities was small and the universities had direct interest and close association with the programmes and performance of its affiliated colleges. During the last few decades, however, the number of colleges affiliated to universities has grown to almost unmanageable proportions. The relationship between the universities and affiliated colleges has degraded to proforma functions, reducing the status of affiliated colleges to mechanical entities.  17  While evolving new directions for higher education and strengthening its quality and relevance, the various Commissions on education underlined the structural weakness of the affiliation system which inhibited the implementation of their major recommendations. College autonomy, in a phased manner was, therefore, advocated as a possible solution.  The NPE-1986 suggested that the autonomy should be available to the colleges in selection of students, appointment and promotion of teachers, determination of courses of study and methods of teaching and choice of areas for research and their promotion. The Programme of Action (PoA) for NPE-1986 recommended developing a large number of autonomous colleges as well as creation of autonomous departments within universities on a selective basis.  UGC appointed a high level committee consisting of Dr. D.S. Kothari, Dr.P.B.Gajendragadkar, Dr.A.C.Joshi, Dr.A.L..Mudaliar, Shri.P.N.Kirpal, Dr.B.Malik, Dr.K.L.Shrimali, Dr.R.K.Singh, Shri. J.P.Naik and Shri.K.L.Joshi to examine the feasibility and mechanism for implementing the recommendations of the Education Commission (1964-66) regarding Autonomous Colleges. In spite of such tireless efforts to introduce college autonomy, the progress till 1978 was disappointing. Dr.Malcolm Adiseshiah, former Vice-Chancellor of Madras University and Former Chairman of the Madras Institute of Development Studies characterized this as follows: “ Everybody is in favour of autonomous colleges. Yet they have been non-starters because everyone, including the colleges, is afraid of disturbing the dismal but demanding status quo.”  Due to the efforts of the Madras University and the Madurai Kamaraj University in 1978, the Tamil Nadu Legislature amended their University Acts providing for autonomous colleges. By June 1978, eight colleges of Madras University and four colleges under Madurai Kamaraj University started functioning as autonomous colleges. In 1984, after concerted efforts, there were only 21 autonomous colleges in the country, 16 in Tamil Nadu, one in Bihar, two in Andhra Pradesh, one in Gujarat, and one in Madhya Pradesh.  The NPE-1986 proposed that 500 colleges should be developed as autonomous colleges in the Seventh Plan Period. It also suggested that provision should be made in various University Acts to grant autonomy to colleges and that UGC should frame guidelines and pattern of assistance to make colleges autonomous and develop instruments for their review and appraisal. At that time, there were about 150 universities and 5,000 colleges in the country.In 1990, a Committee chaired by Acharya Ramamurthy reviewed the NPE-1986 and based on its recommendations a modified policy was tabled in the Parliament on 7th May 1992. While the NPE-1986 did not undergo any major change in the Review, its PoA needed a thorough revision. At this stage, there were 229 universities and 9,274 colleges in the country with an enrollment of 7.1 million students. This review endorsed fully the earlier recommendation on autonomous colleges. The PoA stressed more vigorous implementation of the scheme and increase in the number of autonomous colleges. It also proposed that each State should establish Council of Autonomous Colleges.  3.2 Current Situation  In India, the University system, as we see today, originated about a century and half ago with the establishment of universities at Calcutta, Madras, Bombay, Allahabad and Lahore between 1857 and 1902. These were modeled after the British Universities of that period. As the nation passed through major political, economic and social changes, there have been several reviews of our education system, including the university system especially after  18  independence. The reports of the Radhakrishnan Commission (1948-49), the Kothari Commission (1964-66), the NPE-1968, the NPE-1986 and Review of NPE by Acharya Ramamurthi Commission (1992) contain significant observations and recommendations to strengthen the autonomous character of our university system.  At this stage, when our higher education system consists of 343 university level institutions and about 16,885 colleges, there are many nagging concerns about its role and performance. Many of our reputed universities and colleges have lost their pre-eminent positions. Only a few manage to maintain their status and dignity in an environment of complex socio-economic pressures and worldwide changes in approaches to the educational processes. Under the rapidly expanding situation with multiplicity of expectations from the higher education system, it has become necessary to identify those attributes, which distinguish a first-rate institution from a mediocre one. The complex array of associated issues deserves a total rethinking of our approach to higher education. Serious efforts are now underway to develop the policy perspectives in education involving deeper national introspection and fundamental changes in the structure, content and delivery mechanisms of our university system.  In this context, the scope and implications of providing autonomy to higher education system are discussed in this report. The views presented herein are based on the deliberations in the four Regional Workshops and several hundred responses to the Questionnaire, an analysis of which is presented in Chapter 4.  3.3 The Expanding Higher Education System  The enrollment in the Indian higher education system has increased from 7.42 million in 1999-2000 to about 9.7 million at present, indicating nearly 10 per cent annual growth. The colleges account for about 80 per cent of the enrolment with the rest in the university departments. Thus the programmes available in the college system will largely determine the quality of our higher education.  In the past decade there has been a sharp increase in the number of private colleges as well as universities with the status of either deemed to be universities or State universities. The proportion of eligible age group wishing to enter higher educational institutions will most likely increase significantly from the present level of about 7 per cent. The regulatory mechanisms will perhaps be liberalized.  Higher education is continuing to expand, mostly in an unplanned manner, without even minimum levels of checks and balances. Many universities are burdened with unmanageable number of affiliated colleges. Some have more than 300 colleges affiliated to them. New universities are being carved out of existing ones to reduce the number of affiliated colleges. Under these circumstances, our dependence on autonomy as the means to improve quality of such a huge size of higher education system poses serious challenges.  3.4 An Enabling Provision  The Tenth Plan Profile of Higher education in India prepared by UGC indicated the vision for the higher education system in India for the 21st century. Pointing out the changing trends towards flexibility, the document states: “World over, the higher education is passing through an interesting phase. It is changing radically, by becoming organically flexible in diversity of programmes, in its structure, in its curricula, in its delivery systems and it is adopting itself to innovative use of information and communication technologies.” It, therefore, points out: “The structural convergence of open and conventional education system needs to be addressed as it may provide a solution to enhanced demand for higher education. Credit-based and open-choice approach, even at undergraduate level, would allow much sought for open and flexible system. This may also help to reduce the marginalization of the  19  poor.” The document proposed the agenda to “identify colleges and universities with potential and fund them to reach excellence in teaching and research with greater academic, administrative and financial flexibility; and cultivate and support credit based cafeteria approach education especially in autonomous colleges as well as in colleges and universities with potential for excellence”.  3.5 UGC Guidelines  UGC sent a circular titled “Autonomous Colleges: Criteria, Guidelines and Pattern of Assistance” to all universities highlighting the distortions and consequences of the affiliation system and attributing the failure of all attempts at the reform of University education to the existing rigidity in the structure of the higher education and the lack of academic autonomy. UGC Guidelines (2003) on the scheme of autonomous colleges spelt out the objectives of autonomy as:  • to determine its own courses of study and syllabi;  • to prescribe rules of admission, subject to the reservation policy of the state governments;  • to evolve methods of evaluation and to conduct examination;  • to achieve higher standards and greater creativity;  • to promote national integration; and  • to ensure accountability of the institution and its members.  3.6 Concept of Autonomy  The concept of autonomy is a structural solution intended mainly to provide an enabling environment to improve and strengthen the teaching and learning process. Autonomy alone may not guarantee higher quality, just as non-autonomy need not preclude better performance. The essential factors for high quality education are the caliber and attitudes of students towards learning, the competence and commitment of teachers towards educational processes, the flexibility and foresightedness of the governance system and the social credibility of the educational outcome. The autonomy is expected to provide a better framework for fostering these factors than the affiliation system with all its constraining conditions hanging as a dead weight on the higher education system. Even the limited evidence so far suggests that autonomous colleges have by and large fulfilled the expectations of them.  At the core of the concept of autonomy is the decentralized management culture. The delegation of responsibility with accountability for the academic as well as the associated management functions is essential for the success of autonomy. For understandable reasons, there has been a great deal of reluctance on the part of the higher echelons to delegate these responsibilities to decentralized units. At the same time there are hesitations on the part of the functional units to undertake the decentralized responsibilities. Those who have successfully instituted autonomy consist of visionary leaderships with stable foundations and creditable track records. Others are afraid of treading untested waters. This is a constraint that should be overcome sooner than later.  The successful implementation of the concept of autonomy requires willing and honest participation of the students, teachers and management in the education process. They should be willing to stand up to intense scrutiny of their role in autonomy. A system of academic audit at every step of the implementation of the concept of autonomy should be acceptable to all concerned parties. The facilities for carrying out autonomous functions such as innovations in curricular content, systems of examination and evaluation, teaching methods, supplementary learning, etc. require not only sufficient financial resources but also continuous training and upgradation of teachers. Autonomous institutions should, therefore, have the means to mobilize resources on a predictable basis. Their  20  dependence solely on UGC or state governments which have limited allocations for higher education, will be a serious draw back.  In the rapidly changing teaching-learning environment, an autonomous system can facilitate much needed innovations such as inter-disciplinary programmes, inter-institutional sharing of academic loads, transfer of credits between different modes of learning and so on.  3.7 Issues in Autonomy  The discussion on various issues relevant to the concept of Autonomy which engaged the attention of the CABE Committee were discussed at the University of Madras, Chennai on November 30 and December 1, 2004 under the chairpersonship of Prof. S.P. Thyagarajan, Vice-Chancellor, University of Madras.  Autonomy should necessarily lead to excellence in academics, governance and financial management of the institutions. If it does not lead to this, it can be safely concluded that autonomy has been misused. Academic autonomy is the freedom to decide academic issues like curriculum, instructional material, pedagogy, techniques of students’ evaluation. Administrative autonomy is the freedom to institution to manage its own affairs in regard to administration. It is the freedom to manage the affairs in such a way that it stimulates and encourages initiative and development of individuals working in the institutions and thereby of the institution itself. Financial autonomy is the freedom to the institution to expend the financial resources at its disposal in a prudent way keeping in view its priorities. Autonomy and accountability are two sides of the same coin. Accountability enables the institutions to regulate the freedom given to them by way of autonomy.  Issues  • External Controls on autonomous functioning of universities.  • Restrictions on academic autonomy as a consequence of the limitations of university Acts.  • Government’s interference on vital issues like appointments of Vice-Chancellor, functioning of the Senate, Executive and Academic Council.  • States’ authority over the universities through legislation.  • Wide powers vested in the Chancellors’.  • Appointment of political executives on university bodies.  • Laying down of service conditions.  • Financial aid as a tool to curtail the autonomy of the universities.  • State control on opening of new colleges or grant of affiliation to new colleges.  • Frequent interference of judiciary in matters relating to university affairs.  3.8 Aspects Relevant to Autonomy and Accountability  Autonomy is self-regulation providing responsible exercise of decision-making freedom with full commitment for accountability, and not just decentralisation of selected powers. Accountability is the academic, administrative and financial responsibility with defined goals for each constituent namely teachers, students, administrative staff and all others aiming towards providing quality education for the betterment of the society. The yardstick of measurement of accountability includes self-regulated or agency-regulated adherence to rules; self-motivated efforts towards accountability and pro-active role in conceiving and implementing innovations. The types of accountability  21  would involve individual category-oriented accountability; intra-institutional and inter-institutional accountability, and system oriented accountability  The strengths of ideal autonomy are:  • Innovations.  • Experimentation.  • Expansion and maximization of potentials.  • Quality improvement.  • Societal relevance.  • Full involvement of teachers in the entire system.  • Confidence building between students and teachers.  • Transparency in teaching and evaluation.  • Increased scope for educational reforms.  • Speedy implementation of programmes.  The weaknesses apparent in the present system of autonomy are:  • Autonomy is directed mostly for colleges and not for all higher education institutions.  • Approval process is still time consuming.  • Universities presently do not have complete academic, administrative and financial autonomy and are governed by the state agencies.  • Manpower deficits affect the efficiency of the system.  • Infrastructure shortcomings.  • Implementation obstacles; financial crunch faced by the autonomous institutions.  • Systemic weakness where managements do not support autonomy.  • Apprehensions among teachers about salary and stability.  • Apprehensions among students.  • Insufficient powers, inherent or delegated, to the heads of higher education institutions.  The strengths of achieving accountability are:  • Quality sustenance and quality enhancement in higher education  • Student feed back mechanism to facilitate system oriented quality improvements  • Teachers’ self appraisal to achieve building of confidence and capacity.  • Setting up of benchmarks of accountability and quality.  • Checks and balances for monitoring accountability and quality  • Appraisal to get oriented towards the entire system of higher education.  The weaknesses of the present accountability machinery are:  • Lack of effective surveillance and monitoring of self-financing institutions.  • Only teachers are blamed for accountability and not the administration  • Lack of requisite finance and infrastructure.  22  • Apprehension of exploitation of students and faculty by adopting the appraisal system.  3.9 Bench Marks of Autonomy and Accountability  The benchmarks developed by NAAC need to be effectively put in practice in all higher education institutions. Briefly they include:  • Willingness to accept ownership on quality matters to be achieved by self and peer appraisal of teachers, students and programmes.  • Increase of peer opinion in higher education.  • Restructuring of curricula to update knowledge along with good communication, managerial and entrepreneurship skills and employability.  • Updated teaching-learning methods and modules  • Improved documentation utilizing the advances of information technology.  • Improved student services in IT based learning resources and support services.  • Healthy practices and greater involvement of students, parents and alumni.  3.10 Academic Audit/Quality Assurance System  In order to have an unbiased understanding of whether the quality improvement methodologies have successfully percolated down to various constituents of higher education, an “Academic Audit System” or “ Internal Quality Assurance System” should be implemented. Academic Audit is an educational exercise to asses and improve the performance of teachers/ students/administrative staff and the whole institution in a holistic manner and to have a pragmatic view about what is the present status of academic standards of higher education in a given institution.  Objectives  The basic objectives of Academic audit are:  • To establish a goal oriented performance appraisal system in educational institutions.  • To remove bias, prejudices and subjectivity in the method of performance evaluation.  • To bring out a high level of transparency in the academic evaluation.  • To introduce an invisible but effective mechanism of educational control.  • To motivate teachers to contribute extensively for improvement of educational standards and development of academic culture.  • To create a suitable structure of evaluation of performance for establishing a suitable reward incentive system.  Advantages  The advantages of academic audit as a tool for performance appraisal are :  • Regular teaching and educational advancement.  • Career advancement opportunities for teachers.  • Recognition of professional excellence.  23  • Enhancement of quality standards in higher education.  • Socially useful and productive research.  • Value generation.  • New vistas of knowledge and social and extension services.  Implementing the Academic Audit System  Academic Audit Committees of the Internal Quality Assurance Cells (IQAC) with an in-built monitoring mechanism can play a vital role in rejuvenating institutions of higher education. One would require to care for:  • Nature of the institution.  • Types of academic activities and performance of the institution.  • Courses and educational programmes conducted by the institution.  • Qualifications, standards and year-wise performance of teachers.  • Nature of job profile for teachers and non-teachers.  • Administrative conditions governing the educational activity in the institution.  • Facilities available for research, extension and developmental activities in the institution.  • Linkage with other institutions of national repute.  • Facility for re-training and refresher programmes provided to the teachers.  • Year-wise rate of admissions, dropouts, performance, excellence, employability of students of the institution.  3.11 Progress Towards Autonomy  It may be pertinent to mention here that if institutions are sensitive to their freedom, they should be equally sensitive to their obligations because every fresh assault on the university autonomy always comes as a reaction to some fresh failure on their part. If there has been a continuity and persistence in the university’s demand for autonomy, there has also been a continuous and persistent abuse of that autonomy by some, if not all. There is a need to consider the issue of university autonomy in view of the growing complexity of the nature and functions of the university on the one hand and that of the State on the other. Also, the issue of autonomy needs to be reviewed in relation to the scope of its misuse by those inside the system of higher education. Thus, if it is necessary to look for the safeguards to protect the university autonomy against outside interference, it is equally important to look for the safeguards to protect it against its abuse from inside. It hardly needs any mention that unless the teacher plays an active role and rises to the occasion and becomes the driving force of the system, any modification in the rules and regulations for promoting autonomy would be inconsequential.  Many conferences and seminars have been held to discuss the viability of the concept of autonomy and to understand the reasons behind its insignificant adoption. Everything said and done, it appears that the prospects for higher rate of growth of autonomous colleges in the future appear to be far from satisfactory. The concept of departmental autonomy in the universities seems to be no different. Even the financial incentives have not helped. Several reasons have been attributed for the disappointing progress. Thus far, the colleges that have adopted autonomous system enjoy a high degree of social credibility as judged by the rush for admissions as well as the  24  market demand for their graduates. This perception is likely to be diluted if institutions which cannot sustain the academic and managerial accountability attain the autonomous status. This is a serious dilemma inhibiting the expansion of the autonomous system. Given the systemic constraints on autonomy on the one hand and the fundamental weaknesses of the affiliating system on the other, the nation has to seriously ponder over other available options to quickly move the higher education system to respond to the expectations of the society under the rapidly changing national and global environments. The scope for employability of the graduates from autonomous colleges is demonstrably higher. The facility for mobilization of traditional and non-traditional sources of funding is enhanced by autonomy. International recognition will no longer be based only on the reputation of the affiliating university but also the college in which the graduate is trained and hence the autonomous colleges with higher accreditation rating stand to gain.  In order to reduce the ills of the affiliation system and at the same time incorporate the desirable features of the autonomy, one other option may be for each university to promote autonomous clusters of affiliated colleges as suggested in the Report of the Kothari Commission. Each cluster under the university will perform the curriculum development, examination, evaluation and other functions envisaged in the scheme of autonomy. The present drawback caused by hundreds of colleges under one university creating ineffective guidance will be eliminated. These concerns engaged the CABE Committee to deliberate in-depth the various implications of Academic, Administrative and Financial Autonomy of Higher Education Institutions. These are presented in the Chapters that follow.  25  Chapter 4  Perceptions of Stakeholders on Autonomy of Higher Education Institutions  4.1 The Need  As mentioned in Chapter 1, the CABE Committee had designed a Questionnaire (Annexure-3) with a view to eliciting responses to a variety of parameters which could throw some light on the status of the existing level of autonomy perceived by the higher education institutions in the country. The Questionnaire covered various aspects pertaining to higher education and was mailed to a large of number of stakeholders including Vice-Chancellors; Heads of Institutions; Education Secretaries of State Governments; Directors of Higher Education; Heads of State Councils of Higher Education; Principals of Autonomous Colleges, and about ten percent randomly selected Principals of Affiliated Colleges. The Questionnaire was also put up on the website of UGC with the request to academia and interest groups to download it and to fill in and send it across to the CABE Committee. The present chapter carries the analyses of the questionnaires.  4.2 Profile, Institutional Category, Age of Institution  The basic profile of the institution including name of the respondent, his/her designation, position whether Head of the institution, or teacher, or researcher, or administrator, or associated with management, etc.; the institutional category whether university, or college, or government; level of courses taught; whether the institution is accredited; the age of the institution and level of courses are given in Tables 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4 and 4.5 respectively.  Table 4.1: Category of Respondents  S.No. Category Number of % of Total Number  respondents of Respondents  1 Head of Institution 489 34 2 Teacher 749 51 3 Researcher 18 1 4 Administrator 78 5 5 Management 14 1 6 Others 7 1 7 Position not indicated 98 7 Total 1,453 100  It may be pertinent to mention that while mailing the Questionnaire to the respondents, they were requested to fill in the same either individually or on the basis of collective thinking evolved amongst their colleagues. Though as many as 1,453 filled-in Questionnaires were received, the actual participation appeared to have been larger than that. It is evident from Table 4.1 that most of the respondents were from amongst the academia; of them, 51% were teachers and 34% heads of institutions.  o Prominent amongst the respondents are teachers & heads of institutions.  26  Table 4.2: Respondents belonging to Category of Institutions  S.No. Categories Respondents* % of Respondents  University Level  1 State Universities 390 64  2 Central Universities 100 16  3 Deemed Universities 67 11  4 Private Aided Institutions 47 8  5 Private Non-Aided Institutions 3 1  Total 607 100  College Level  6 Private Aided Colleges 477 47  7 Government Colleges 292 28  8 Autonomous Colleges 128 13  9 Private Non-aided Colleges 118 12  Total 1,015 100  Government level  10 State Government 428 85  11 Central Government 52 10  12 Union Territory 27 5  Total 507 100  It is evident that a total of 607 responses were from degree awarding institutions. Out of this 64% were from State Universities, followed by 16% from Central Universities. Out of the 1,015 responses received from Colleges, majority of them were from Private Aided Colleges (47%), followed by Government Colleges (28%). In the Government category, majority of responses (85%) were from State Government followed by Central Government (10%).  o Good-sized participation is from State universities and private aided colleges.  * It may be noted that the total number of respondents and those indicated in the Tables may not tally, for in certain cases a respondent seemed to have ticked in more than one category.  27  Table 4.3: Type of Respondent Institutions on the Issue of Accreditation  S.No. Categories Respondents % Respondents  1 Accredited 903 71  2 Non-Accredited 371 29  Total 1,274 100  Table 4.4: Age of Respondent Institutions  S.No. Age of Institution Respondents % Respondents  1 More than 50 years 464 32  2 20 – 50 years 623 43  3 10 – 20 years 149 10  4 5 – 10 years 106 8  5 Less than 5 years 95 7  Total 1,437 100  Table 4.5: Level of Courses Taught in Respondent Institutions  S.No. Categories Respondents % Respondents  1 UG , PG & Research 503 37  2 UG Only 363 27  3 UG & PG 344 26  4 PG only 99 7  5 Research only 20 2  6 PG & Research 19 1  Total 1,348 100  71% of the respondents turned out to be from accredited institutions. A sizeable number of the respondents (32%) were from amongst those institutions which were more than 50 years old. Besides, 43% of the respondents were from institutions within the age group of 20-50 years. As many as 37% of the respondents belonged to institutions having UG, PG and Research programmes.  o About three quarters of respondents belong to accredited institutions. o 75% of the respondents came from institutions in existence for over two decades. o One-third of the respondents belong to institutions having UG, PG & research  programmes.  28  4.3 Academic Autonomy of Institutions  Responses were sought in relation to who determines the curriculum and issues related thereto, the question of autonomy in the formulation of curriculum of various courses, the admission policy followed for entry into general, professional and self-financing courses, including the intake in these courses, and the fee structure; workload of teachers; recruitment of teaching/non teaching staff. The relevant data are given in Tables 4.6, 4.7, 4.8, 4.9, 4.10, 4.11, 4.12 and 4.13.  Table 4.6: Determination of Curriculum  S.No. Agency No. of Respondents Favouring the Present  System  Yes No 1 Board of Studies / Council 694 559 128 (48%) (81%) (18%) 2 Academic Council 225 187 37 (15%) (83%) (16%) 3 State Council / Higher Education 25 21 3 Commission (2%) (84%) (12%) 4 UGC 19 17 2 (1%) (89%) (11%) 5 Teacher 17 13 4 (1%) (76%) (24%) 6 Other Regulatory Bodies 17 8 6 (1%) (47%) (35%) 7 Vice-Chancellor 13 10 2 (1%) (77%) (15%) 8 Executive 12 3 9 (1%) (25%) (75%) 9 Student 4 2 1 (50%) (25%) 10 Management 3 3 (100%)  11.. Others* 424 311 81 (29%) (73%) (19%) Total 1,453 1,134 273 (100%) (78%) (19%)  It is evident from the data that in the existing system, the curriculum is largely determined by Board of Studies and Academic Council as it is stated by 63% of the respondents. Interestingly, the existing system found favour from over 80% respondents.  o Board of Studies and Academic Councils determine curriculum. o Existing system finds favour with most.  *In Table 4.6 as well as in the subsequent Tables, the category others denotes the combination of more than one option exercised by the respondents.  29  Table 4.7: Determination of Admission Policy (For General, Professional & Self-financing Courses)  S.No. Who Decides General Courses Professional Courses Self-financing Courses      
Admission Policy  Favouring the Present System No of Respon Favouring the Present System  Favouring the Present System  No of Respondents  No of Respondents  No of Respondents  Favouring the Present System  Favouring the Present System  Favouring the Present System  Favouring the Present System  dents  No of Respondents  No of Respondents  No of Respondents  No of Respondents  No of Respondents       
1. Affiliating 381 293 77 214 166 44 241 181 54 University (26%) (77%) (20%) (15%) (78%) (21%) (17%) (75%) (22%)  2. Individual 358 298 46 292 238 40 442 349 72 Institution (25%) (83%) (13%) (20%) (82%) (14%) (30%) (79%) (16%)  3. State 327 210 106 242 169 68 158 100 53 Government (23%) (64%) (32%) (17%) (70%) (28%) (11%) (63%) (34%)  4. Central 10 4 6 12 2 10 5 1 4 Government ( 1%) (40%) (60%) ( 1%) (17%) (83%) (.5%) (20%) (80%)  5. Other Regulatory 7 5 2 53 32 19 18 13 5 Bodies (71%) (29%) ( 4%) (60%) (36%) ( 1%) (72%) (28%)  6. UGC 3 3 11 9 2 7 7  (100%) ( 1%) (82%) (18%) (.5%) (100%)  7. No comments 143 90 31 502 355 106 423 297 95 (10%) (63%) (22%) (35%) (71%) (21%) (29%) (70%) (22%)  8. Others 224 147 67 127 79 46 159 102 52 (15%) (66%) (30%) ( 9%) (62%) (36%) (11%) (64%) (33%)  Total 1,453 1,050 335 1,453 1,050 335 1,453 1,050 335 (100%) (72%) (23%) (100%) (72%) (23%) (100%) (72%) (23%)  Yes No Yes No Yes No  Table 4.7 reveals that there are three major players namely university, individual institution and the State government in determining the admission policy with a little variation here and there. Most of the respondents seemed to have favoured the existing system.  o Admission policy is determined by university, individual institution  and the State government. o Existing system finds favour with most.  30  Table 4.8: Determination of Intake Capacity (For General, Professional & Self-financing Courses)  S.No. Who Decides General Courses Professional Courses Self-financing Courses  Admission  Policy  Favouring the Present System No of  Respondents No of Respon Favouring the Present System  1 Affiliating 630 474 145 262 199 61 408 295 105 University (43%) (75%) (23%) (18%) (76%) (23%) (28%) (72%) (26%)  2 Individual 329 267 27 266 207 19 354 276 33 Institution (23%) (81%) ( 8%) (18%) (78%) (7%) (25%) (78%) ( 9%)  3 State 163 108 46 147 109 30 76 48 22 Government (11%) (66%) (28%) (10%) (74%) (20%) ( 5%) (63%) (29%)  4 Central 3 1 2 11 3 7 3 2 1 Government (33%) (67%) ( 1%) (27%) (64%) (67%) (33%)  5 Other Regulatory 17 10 6 114 67 39 43 27 15 Bodies ( 1%) (59%) (35%) ( 8%) (59%) (34%) ( 3%) (63%) (35%)  6 UGC 16 15 1 23 22 1 18 18  ( 1%) (94%) (6%) ( 2%) (96%) ( 4%) ( 1%) (100%)  7 No comments 172 97 33 529 376 107 469 335 88 (12%) (56%) (19%) (36%) (71%) (20%) (32%) (71%) (19%)  8 Others 123 77 36 101 66 32 82 48 32 ( 9%) (63%) (29%) ( 7%) (65%) (32%) ( 6%) (59%) (39%)  Total 1,453 1,049 296 1,453 1,049 296 1,453 1,049 296 (100%) (72%) (20%) (100%) (72%) (20%) (100%) (72%) (20%)  No of Respon Favouring the Present System  dents  Yes No Yes No dents  Yes No  Table 4.8 reveals that there are four major players in determining the intake capacity namely, university, individual institution, State government and Regulatory Bodies. It, however, varies from one type of courses to another. While the intake for general and self-financing courses is largely determined by the affiliating university and the individual institutions, in the case of professional courses, it is determined by the regulatory body.  o Students’ intake for general and professional courses is determined by universities and regulatory bodies respectively.  31  Table 4.9: Authority for Determining Fee Structure (For General, Professional & Self-financing Courses)  S.No. Who Decides General Courses Professional Courses Self-financing Courses  Admission  Policy No of  Respondents  1 Affiliating 346 257 71 183 147 32 190 143 39 University (24%) (74%) (21%) (13%) (80%) (17%) (13%) (75%) (21%)  2 Individual 370 312 48 331 270 44 508 407 81 Institution (25%) (84%) (13%)) (23%) (82%) (13%) (35%) (80%) (16%)  3 State 387 264 104 273 180 84 168 107 54 Government (27%) (68%) (27%) (19%) (66%) (31%) (12%) (64%) (32%)  4 Central 3 2 9 3 5 2 1 1 Government (67%) ( 1%) (33%) (56%) (50%) (50%)  5 Other Regulatory 9 6 3 30 15 15 18 9 8 Bodies ( 1%) (67%) (33%) ( 2%) (50%) (50%) ( 1%) (50%) (44%) 6 UGC 2 2 7 6 1 4 4  (100%) (86%) (14%) (100%)  7 No comments 175 94 40 523 363 101 448 301 91 (12%) (54%) (23%) (36%) (69%) (19%) (31%) (67%) (20%)  8 Others 161 109 47 97 62 31 115 74 39 (11%) (68%) (29%) ( 6%) (64%) (32%) ( 8%) (64%) (34%)  Total 1,453 1,046 313 1,453 1,046 313 1,453 1,046 313 (100%) (72%) (22%) (100%) (72%) (22%) (100%) (72%) (22%)  Favouring the Present System No of  Respondents  Favouring the Present System  No of Respon Favouring the Present System  dents Yes No Yes No Yes No  It is inferred from Table 4.9 that the fee structure for various courses is determined by the state, the university and the individual institution. The present system of determining the fee structure seemed to have found favour with most.  o Fee structure is determined by the State, University  and individual institution.  o Present system of determining fee is favoured by  most.  32  Table 4.10: Authority for Determining Work Load of Teachers  S.No. Agency No. of Respondents Favouring the Present System  Yes No  1 Affiliating University 238 175 56 (16%) (74%) (24%) 2 Individual Institution 260 230 19 (18%) (88%) ( 7%) 3 State Government 305 196 104 (21%) (64%) (34%) 4 Central Government 9 5 3 ( 1%) (56%) (33%) 5 Other Regulatory Bodies 38 27 10 ( 3%) (71%) (26%) 6 UGC 342 272 55 (23%) (80%) (16%) 7 No comments 45 15 12 ( 3%) (33%) (27%) 8 Others 216 148 54 (15%) (69%) (25%) Total 1,453 1,068 313 (100%) (74%) (22%)  It may be pertinent to mention that as of today it is the UGC which determines the work-load for the teachers. The existing system seemed to have found favour with most of the respondents.  o Existing system of determining work load of teachers by UGC finds favour with most.  33  Table 4.11: Authority for Recruitment of Teaching Staff  S.No. Agency No. of Respondents Favouring the Present System  Yes No  1 Affiliating University 141 113 23 (10%) (80%) (16%) 2 Individual Institution 613 474 105 (42%) (77%) (17%) 3 State Government 442 350 69 (31%) (79%) (16%) 4 Central Government 3 3  (100%) 5 Other Regulatory Bodies 48 37 7 ( 3%) (77%) (15%) 6 UGC 17 13 3 ( 1%) (76%) (18%) 7 No comments 50 18 6 ( 3%) (36%) (12%) 8 Others 139 113 19 (10%) (81%) (14%) Total 1,453 1,121 232 (100%) (77%) (16%)  It is inferred from Table 4.11 that the recruitment of teaching staff is mainly carried out by individual institutions, State government and affiliating Universities.  o Present system of recruitment of teachers is favoured by most.  Table 4.12: Authority for Determining Norms/Qualifications for Teaching Staff  S.No. Agency No. of Respondents Favouring the Present System  Yes No 1 Affiliating University 202 165 33 (14%) (82%) (16%) 2 Individual Institution 103 82 8 ( 7%) (80%) ( 8%) 3 State Government 291 228 58 (20%) (78%) (20%) 4 Central Government 11 6 5 ( 1%) (55%) (45%) 5 Other Regulatory Bodies 56 42 9 ( 4%) (75%) (16%) 6 UGC 473 394 56 (33%) (83%) (12%) 7 No comments 40 10 3 ( 3%) (25%) ( 8%) 8 Others 277 194 60 (19%) (70%) (22%) Total 1,453 1,121 232 (100%) (77%) (16%)  It is clear from Table 4.12 that qualifications of teachers and other recruitment norms are determined by UGC. The present system appeared to have found favour with most of the respondents.  o Laying down of norms for recruitment of teachers by the UGC is favoured by most.  34  General Table 4.13: Authority for Conduct of Examination and Award of Degrees (For General, Professional & Self financing Courses)  Courses Professional Courses Self-financing Courses S.No. AgencyFavouring the  Present System No of  Respondents No of Respon Favouring the Present System  1 University 925 792 116 738 617 109 690 577 103 (64%) (86%) (13%) (51%) (84%) (15%) (48%) (84%) (15%)  2 College 253 224 20 118 109 4 191 13 (17%) (89%) (8%) ( 8%) (92%) ( 3%) 218 (15%) (88%) ( 6%)  3 Individual 81 72 9 81 73 8 96 88 8 Institution ( 6%) (89%) (11%) ( 5%) (90%) (10%) ( 7%) (92%) ( 8%)  4 No comments 188 136 30 503 423 50 442 367 51 (13%) (72%) (16%) (35%) (84%) (10%) (30%) (83%) (12%)  5 Others 6 5 1 13 7 5 7 6 1 (83%) (17%) ( 1%) (54%) (38%) (86%) (14%)  Total 1,453 1,229 176 1,453 1,229 176 1,453 1,229 176 (100%) (85%) (12%) (100%) (85%) (12%) (100%) (85%) (12%)  Favouring the Present System  dents  No of ResponYes No Yes No dents  Yes No  It is inferred from Table 4.13 that the responsibility of both the conduct of examinations and the award of degrees is shouldered by the University. It is only in respect of autonomous colleges where the examinations are conducted by the colleges while the degree is awarded by the affiliating University.  o Invariably both the conduct of examination and  award of degrees are done by the University.  35  Table 4.14: Degree of Existing Academic Autonomy  S.No. Agency No. of Respondents Favouring the Present System  Yes No  1 Partial Autonomy 674 344 306 (49%) (51%) (45%) 2 Nil Autonomy 387 115 246 (28%) (30%) (64%) 3 Absolute Autonomy 319 303 9 (23%) (95%) ( 3%) Total 1,380 762 561 (100%) (55%) (41%)  Table 4.15: Linking of Autonomy with Accreditation  S.No. Issue Yes No 1 Does the existing level of autonomy meet the minimum standards 964 343  required for accreditation? (74%) (26%)  Table 4.16: Preference for Autonomy  S.No. Type of Autonomy Percentage of Respondents  who Proposed  1 Absolute 76%  2 Partial 17%  3 With Accountability 7%  It is inferred from Table 4.14 that the existing academic autonomy appeared to be at three levels. While 23% admitted to have absolute autonomy, 49% admitted only partial autonomy and as against it 28% felt that there was no academic autonomy at all. 95% of the respondents from the first category favoured absolute autonomy while 51% from the second category favoured partial autonomy. 74% of the respondents are of the opinion that the existing level of autonomy enables them to meet the minimum standards required for accreditation. Those respondents who were not satisfied with the present level of autonomy preferred absolute autonomy.  o Most respondents opted for absolute autonomy.  o Excellence warrants absolute autonomy.  36  Table 4.17: Autonomous Colleges  S.No. Issue: Should the autonomous status to a college be limited to: Yes No  1 College with Potential for excellence 901 202  (82%) (18%)  2 NAAC Accredited System 852 517  (62%) (38%) 3 Should grading be fixed at B Level 443 101  (81%) (19%) 4 National Board of Accreditation (NBA) Accredited Institutions 202  (100%)  It is evident from Table 4.17 that the respondents felt that only the institution with proven excellence and adjudged by accrediting agencies might be conferred the autonomous status.  o Institutions with proven track record should be given autonomous status.  Table 4.18: Most Preferred Criteria for Determining the Quality of Institution  S.No. Criteria Proposed Number of Respondents  1. Rating by accrediting agencies 361 (25%)  2 Employment profile 229 (16%)  3 Overall number of Merit Positions 227 (16%)  4 Pass Percentage 113 ( 8%)  5 Publications 21 ( 1%)  6 Rating Press 3  7 No Comments 102 ( 7%)  8 Others 397 (27%)  Total 1,453 (100%)  It is evident from Table 4.18 that the most vital parameters for adjudging the quality of an institution turns out to be the rating by accrediting agencies, their employment profile and the number of merit positions scored by the institution.  o Rating by accrediting agencies, employment profile and overall number of merit positions turns out to be vital parameters for determining the quality of an institution.  37  Table 4.19: Authority for Determining Norms/Qualifications  for Non-Teaching Staff  S.No. Agency No. of Respondents Favouring the Present System  Yes No  1 State Government 690 548 117 (47%) (79%) (17%)  2 Institution 283 225 30 (20%) (80%) (11%)  3 Affiliating University 172 136 30 (12%) (79%) (17%)  4 UGC 50 40 8 ( 3%) (80%) (16%)  5 Other Regulatory Bodies 29 22 6 ( 2%) (76%) (21%)  6 Central Government 12 7 5 ( 1%) (58%) (42%)  7 No comments 71 35 4 ( 5%) (49%) ( 6%)  8 Others 146 108 32 (10%) (74%) (22%)  Total 1,453 1,121 232 (100%) (77%) (16%)  Table 4.19 reveals that the norms for non-teaching staff are determined mainly by State government, individual institutions and affiliating university.  o Norms for non-teaching staff are determined by State government,  affiliating university and individual institutions.  38  Table 4.20: Responses on Pertinent Aspects of Autonomy & Accountability  S.No. Issue Reaction of the Respondents  Yes No  1 Do you feel the need of having regulatory bodies like UGC, 1,280 91 AICTE, MCI, PCI, etc. for maintaining standards? (93%) (7%)  2 Do you feel UGC model curriculum encroaches upon autonomy 458 901 of University? (34%) (66%)  3 Are you in favour of self-financing courses? 912 468 (66%) (34%)  4 Are you in favour of separate Commission of teacher like 744 554 Civil Services? (57%) (43%)  5 Whether your institution enjoys autonomy? 736 641 (53%) (47%)  6 Are you satisfied with the level of academic autonomy enjoyed 790 516 by the Institution? (60%) (40%)  7 Does the Institution which conducts the exam enjoys freedom to 587 413 decide the mode of exam? (59%) (41%)  8 Do you agree that the Institution should run like a profit 457 793 centre to enjoy financial autonomy? (37%) (63%)  9 Do you agree whether high level position of Chancellor / 1,196 139 Vice-Chancellor / Pro Vice-Chancellor should be prescribed (90%) (10%) by statutes in all categories of Institutions?  10 Should there be statutes for appointment of Vice-Chancellors 1,253 92 to avoid interferences? (93%) (7%)  11 Should there be statutes for appointment of members of high 1,281 82 level policy making bodies to avoid interferences? (94%) (6%)  Table 4.20 reveals that a large percentage of respondents (93%) favour having regulatory bodies for the maintenance of standards. 66% of the respondents did not consider UGC model curriuculum as an encroachment on their autonomy. Self-financing courses seemed to have found favour with 66% of the respondents. 57% of the respondents favour establishment of separate Commission of Teachers like Civil Services. As many as 62% of the respondents expressed themselves against profiteering in higher education. Over 90% of the respondents favour the prescribed statutes for the appointment of Vice-Chancellor and Pro Vice-Chancellor to avoid interference of any kind.o Most respondents favour regulatory bodies for ensuring academic standards.  o Sizeable number of respondents favour self-financing programmes. o Most respondents favour the prescription of statutes for appointment of high level  positions to avoid interference of any kind.  39  4.4 Financial Autonomy  In respect of financial autonomy responses were elicited in regard to the extent of existing financial autonomy, exercise of powers with reference to spending of funds, extending financial autonomy to different functionaries of the institutions, auditing of accounts, etc. The responses received are given in Tables 4.21 and 4.22  Table 4.21: Degree of Autonomy Exercised with Reference to Spending of Funds Received from Various Organizations  S.No Agency Absolute With Nil Satisfaction Level  Autonomy Restriction Autonomy Expressed on  Existing Autonomy Satisfactory Not Satisfactory  1 UGC 275 727 100 662 252  (25%) (66%) (9%) (72%) (28%)  2 State 186 668 154 499 223  Government (18%) (66%) (16%) (69%) (31%)  3 Central 146 475 108 367 198  Government (20%) (65%) (15%) (65%) (35%)  4 Other 219 472 81 387 193  Sources (28%) (61%) (11%) (67%) (33%)  Table 4.22: Financial Autonomy Delegated to Other Functionaries  S.No. Designation of the Official Number of Respondents % Respondents  1 Head of the Department 1,011 70  2 Dean 768 53  3 Financial Advisor / Officer 646 44  4 Director 181 12  5 Registrar 108 7  It appears from Tables 4.21 & 4.22 that insofar as spending is concerned, the institutions enjoy considerable amount of autonomy.  o Institutions have a great deal of financial autonomy in incurring expenditure.  40  4.5 Hypothesis and its Converse  Part-B of the Questionnaire provided questions arranged in pairs – a hypothesis and its converse. The respondents were to agree with one or the other but not both. Analysis of their responses with regard to academic autonomy, student admissions, discipline and fees, and management autonomy are given in Tables 4.23, 4.24 and 4.25  Table 4.23: Response on the Hypothesis/Converse on Academic Autonomy  S.No. Hypothesis Agree Agree % Converse Agree Agree %  Fully Partially agreed Fully Partiaagreed to to hypolly converse  thesis  1 All teachers should be allowed to devise their  493 223 58% 157 371 42%  own syllabus subject to common norms.  2 Syllabus should be  updated years.  If more than half of the respondents have registered their responses in support of the hypothesis, it is presumed while interpreting these results that they are in favour of the proposed arrangements.  It is evident from Table 4.23 that a large number of respondents are in favour of periodic updation of curriculum, ensuring increased relevance of courses, introduction of career oriented courses, replacing existing carry over system by credit system, accounting of extra-curricular activities towards final assessment. Respondents also favour the decentralization of evaluation system as also the freedom of individual teachers in designing their courses.  o Periodic updation of curriculum, ensuring its relevance, introduction of career-oriented courses, credit system, decentralization of evaluation system and designing of courses by individual teachers find favour with most respondents.  after every three  1,089 112 92% 24 77 8%  3 Courses should relate to situations in the real world.  1,103 143 97% 14 23 3%  4 Colleges should conduct self-supporting vocational, job-oriented  1,000 201 93% 32 57 7% courses.  5 Credit system should replace present carry over system.  762 241 79% 77 194 21%  6 Student evaluation should be decentralized; Institutes should have  555 130 53% 59 558 47%  freedom to conduct own examinations.  7 Final grading of students should include performance in extra 671 265 72% 53 311 28% curricular activities.  Only a few select colleges should have the autonomy to design syllabi.  Syllabus should not be changed frequently.  Courses should concentrate on classical knowledge.  Preparing students for jobs is not the responsibility of colleges.  Present system is tried and proven and should continue.  Only universities should conduct examination to ensure uniform standards.  Final grading should be limited to academic performance.  41  Table 4.24: Response on the Hypothesis / Converse on Student Admissions, Discipline and Fees  S.No. Hypothesis Agree Agree % Converse Agree Agree %  Fully Partially agreed Fully Partiaagreed to to hypolly converse  thesis 1 Institute should have autonomy to admit  918 119 80% 33 227 20% students directly subject to prescribed norms.  2 Admissions should be restricted in courses that suffer from joblessness.  467 245 55% 152 432 45%  3 College education should  be free.  237 352 47% 273 403 53%  4 Average student fees should reflect costs; rich  321 156 37% 95 717 63% students should cross subsidize the poor.  5 Government grants and student fees should cover  840 242 84% 108 98 16% full costs of education.  6 Student fees should be raised whenever faculty salaries are raised or  359 317 52% 151 461 48% national income increases.  7 Those who fail should not  get scholarships.  876 161 80% 84 178 20%  8 Those that fail to complete their course work within prescribed number of  744 239 77% 125 174 23%  years should be transferred to Open Universities.  All admissions should be centralized.  No restriction should be imposed on admissions irrespective of job situation. The market should decide the fees.  Fees should be the same for every student but poor students should get loan assistance.  Graduates and/or their employers should pay a cess to support undergraduate education. Student fees should be nominal and have no relation to faculty costs or per capita income.  Scholarships should be given to the poor regardless of their ability.  Once admitted, students should be free to continue as long as they desire.  It is inferred from Table 4.24 that a large number of respondents favour the shared responsibility of government and students to meeting out the cost of education. The concept of cross subsidizing of fees from rich to poor does not find favour. As many as 80% of the respondents favoured granting autonomy to institutions to admit students and an equal number opposed granting scholarships to non-performing students. Data also reveal that 77% of the respondents favour transferring non-performing students from the conventional system to the open learning system.  o Cost of education should be collectively borne by the State and students o Cross subsidizing of fee is not favoured. o Only academically performing students should be entitled to continuation of financial assistance.  42  Table 4.25: Response on the Hypothesis / Converse on Management Autonomy  S.No. Hypothesis Agree Agree % Converse Agree Agree %  Fully Partially agreed Fully Partiaagreed to to hypolly converse  thesis  1 All Institutes should be regulated according to a  824 152 75% 110 210 25% common set of national norms.  2 Institutes should have freedom to collect and operate endowments.  836 255 84% 62 152 16%  3 Only reputed academics and professional experts should serve on different  1,187 105 98% 15 11 2%  governing bodies.  4 Administrators should be selected faculty who from have among training those  1,011 118 86% 40 146 14%  and aptitude for that.  5 Only those with minimum three years of service left may be appointed to  441 208 50% 171 488 50%  administrative positions. 6 Institutes should have freedom to select their  821 125 72% 67 298 28% own faculty subject to approved norms.  7 Faculty may be transferred only at beginning of academic  910 176 86% 67 105 14%  year.  8 Managements should have freedom to collect  300 240 42% 174 584 58% fees according to capacity to pay.  Institutes may be regulated differently in accordance with the national, state, district and municipal norms. All endowments should be centrally pooled and disbursed by the central authority.  Politicians and promoters should sit on the governing bodies.  Faculty should be appointed to administrative positions strictly according to seniority.  Senior faculty should not be denied admini-strative positions because of approaching retirement.  There should be central selection commission for selecting faculty.  Managements should be free to transfer faculty according to administrative exigencies.  Fees should strictly be the same irrespective of income.  It may be inferred from Table 4.25 that a large number of respondents favour governing bodies with only renowned professionals and experts. Besides, they also favoured for regulation of institutions as per common set of national norms. A large number of respondents favoured the appointments of only experienced personnel with appropriate attitude to administrative positions. An equal number of respondents also favoured transfers of the faculty to be effected prior to the commencement of academic session. Majority also favoured freedom to institution to collect and operate endowments.  o Most favour common set of national norms for regulation of institutions. o Transfer of faculty to be effected prior to the commencement of academic session. o Administrative responsibility be given only to those faculty who have training and aptitude for that.  43  4.6 Qualitative Analysis of Responses on Academic, Financial and Administrative autonomy  Based on the analysis of the perspectives provided by the respondents of all categories to the Questionnaire as given in the various Tables in this chapter, response distilled from the data analyzed are presented below:  It is evident from the analyses of the data that prominent amongst the respondents were teachers and heads of institutions. A sizeable number of respondents were from State universities and private aided colleges. It may be worth mentioning here that about three quarters of the respondents were from accredited institutions and equal number of respondents were from institutions having under-graduate, post-graduate and research programmes. Besides, three quarters of respondents are from such institutions as have been in existence for over two decades.  Most of the respondents seemed to have expressed their satisfaction with the existing modalities wherein the curriculum is determined by both Academic Council and Board of Studies. Similarly, the respondents have not suggested significant changes in the existing system of admission policy, intake capacity and fee structure. They seemed to have agreed with the present system where these issues are determined by the regulatory bodies, State, university and individual institutions.  One thing that has prominently emerged out of the analysis is the need for absolute autonomy as it is perceived to be the most important pre-requisite for achieving excellence. It has culminated into a strong argument in support of the fact that only institutions with proven track record be conferred the autonomous status. Analyses of results have thrown up three vital parameters for determining the quality of an institution, namely the rating by accrediting agencies, employment profile and overall number of merit positions. Besides, other parameters that found favour with most respondents turned out to be periodic updation of curriculum, ensuring its relevance, introduction of career-oriented courses, self financing courses, credit system, decentralization of evaluation system and designing of courses by individual teachers.  The present system of determining norms and qualifications of teachers, mode of recruitment and determination of workload, which is currently prescribed by UGC, was favoured by most of the respondents. The significance of the regulatory bodies for the maintenance of standards has prominently emerged in the analysis as it found favour with most of the respondents. The idea of associating renowned professionals and experts with important decision making bodies found favour with most. Merit, aptitude and consistent professional achievement, which turned out to be the most vital parameters for appointments in institutions of higher education found favour with most of the respondents. Most of the respondents have also favoured the prescription of statutes for appointments in high level positions to avoid interference of any kind.  An interesting thing that has emerged out of the analyses is that the cost of education ought to be met collectively by both the State and the students. Most of the respondents favoured the idea of common fee structure for all with no cross subsidizing. Another important observation that has emerged is that only academically performing students should be entitled to continuation of financial assistance. Further, the analysis of data also revealed that most of the institutions did enjoy a great deal of financial autonomy in incurring expenditure.  44  Chapter 5  Academic Autonomy  Various aspects dealing with Academic Autonomy in higher education were discussed in the Regional Workshops at Chennai (November 30th – 1st December, 2004), Pune (8th –9th December, 2004), Guwahati (28th –29th December, 2004) and Chandigarh (20th –21st January, 2005) under the Chairmanship of Dr. M. Anandakrishnan, Ex Vice-Chairman, Tamil Nadu State Council for Higher Education; Prof. Pravin J. Patel, ViceChancellor, Sardar Patel University, Vallabh Vidyanagar; Prof. G.D. Sharma, Vice-Chancellor, Nagaland University, Kohima; and Prof. L.R. Verma, Vice-Chancellor, Himachal Pradesh University, Shimla respectively. Each group deliberated at length on issues such as outlining the contours of the concept of academic autonomy and identifying practical approaches to achieving it with a view to creating an enabling environment to nurture quality and excellence in higher education. Besides, they also examined implications of autonomy in its entirety. The list of participants associated with these discussion groups is given in Annexures – 5a, 5b, 5c and 5d.  5.1 Scope of Academic Autonomy  In the emerging knowledge society of the 21st century, higher education has become the most important tool of development and the universities have become the real hub of knowledge generation. University is the place where knowledge is not only imparted but it is also created through research. Therefore, research is considered as important as teaching in the universities. However, knowledge produced through research has not only to be new but also to be valid in order to enhance the adaptive capability of the human society. Therefore, originality, creativity, intellectual honesty and integrity need to be considered important values in good universities. These values, therefore, are to be consciously promoted on the campuses of the universities and colleges. These, however, necessitate the freedom to differ from traditional or established authority, freedom of expression, and freedom from any kind of fear. Therefore, the freedom of dissent which happens to be the crux of the academic autonomy should be corner stone of the university system.  Although academic autonomy is inseparable from administrative and financial autonomy, the concept of academic autonomy may, however, be operationalised in terms of as freedom in:  • admitting students  • revising syllabi and courses  • regulation of courses  • choosing suitable teaching methods  • evaluating students  • recruiting and promoting teachers  • opening of new programmes and terminating obsolete ones  45  • the pursuit of truth without any fear or favour  5.2 Basic Concerns for Academic Autonomy  Any meaningful discussion on matters pertaining to academic autonomy need to take into account the following propositions:  • A distinctive character of academic autonomy is an environment which encourages dissent and innovation as much as the consensus and creation of this environment. Hence any discussion about the autonomy in higher education involves addressing this basic premise.  • Research in higher education can only thrive in an open and conducive environment wherein the researchers are given a free hand and full administrative support to enable them to implement their constructive and innovative ideas. This may be carried out by following broad guidelines with an in-built mechanism of midcourse correction.  • Productivity in terms of acquisition of competencies and skills should be an integral part of the education system and not solely in terms of monetary benefits. Important checks here ought to be that autonomy should not become adjunct to liberalization and should not fall prey to market pressures, domestic as well as international and that it must protect the interests of the three major stakeholders, namely, students, faculty and society.  5.3 Major Inferences Based on Discussions  The following are the major points/suggestions/inferences, which emerged during discussions on academic autonomy in higher education institutions:  A. Admissions  • Since the entry level itself becomes a deciding factor in turning out the finished product, it is relevant to emphasize this aspect. Bigger systems of centralized admissions in general colleges pose a problem due to regional requirements. Hence, admissions in general courses may be directly done by the institutes themselves. However, professional institutions may admit students either by conducting their own examinations or through the state/regional/national level entrance examination.  • Performance in entrance examination should not be the sole criterion for admission in institutions of higher education. A composite index may be evolved by way of giving proper weightage to other vital parameters such as academic performance in classes X and XII, extra-curricular activities and performance in the interview.  • Number of students admitted to a course must be in accordance with the facilities and physical infrastructure available so as not to compromise on the quality of teaching.  B. Curriculum /Syllabi/ New Courses  • One of the essential pre-requisites of academic autonomy is the designing of courses (from conception to evaluation) and the introduction of the credit-based system. The credit system should ideally enable students to learn at their own pace either faster than the other or slower than the other with a broad time frame for completion. Earning a degree needs to be defined not in prescribed and  46  uniform time span but in terms of credits earned. For example, a degree course with 180 credits must be accomplished with a minimum period of 3 years and maximum period of 6 years.  • The credit system requires standardization and this demands a definition that cuts across all educational institutions. The relationship between marks and credits should be clearly established. Equivalence can be established across institutions and states. This will permit true academic freedom of choice of courses/groups of courses/varied combinations as well as the choice of institutions.  • The course content should be innovative besides being interdisciplinary and competitive leading to development of newer ideas and culminating into tangible results. It should not be purely marketdriven or catering to the needs of the industry as it may lead to glut of graduates in one discipline while creating crisis in another. Instead, broad based programme mode ought to be followed wherein students are given multiple choice of courses and subjects.  • The role of the regulatory authority ought to be indicative as far as laying down of course content and standards is concerned. Teacher should be given the freedom to design the course content. The courses may, however, be so designed that they provide for enough flexibility and equip the students to confront the forces of the world of work in an effective manner.  • The self-financed courses that are being increasingly introduced ought to be properly regulated. They should not be used as means of collecting money but the resources accrued through these ought to be ploughed back in the institute itself.  • Freedom to design syllabi should be an essential part of academic autonomy. It should have a two-fold aim; make students good human beings (opportunities for learning team-work, values); and make them employable (acquiring soft skills, namely communication, presentation, management, life-coping skills)  • Academic freedom means moving away from mechanical transfer of information to imparting education in the truest sense of the term. Autonomous institutions, therefore, should become the centres of human development promoting both cognitive and non-cognitive capacities amongst its subjects.  • There is a growing tendency in international and national circles to have cross/interdisciplinary courses, multidisciplinary courses, multiple degrees, concurrent degrees, etc. This aspect should, therefore, be borne in mind while devising the course contents so as to ensuring their acceptability at various levels.  C. Examination and Evaluation  • A method of continuous assessment of students’ performance is extremely essential. This may require application of both multiple criteria of assessment as also multiple sources of assessment.  • Credit-based system of evaluation must be adopted to mitigate any scope of disadvantage to a student. However, the degrees and marksheets must be accompanied with the transcription so that the student does not face any difficulty while applying for higher studies or jobs.  • There is a dire need to bring about reforms in the examination system. It should be designed to evaluate learner’s analytical capability and problem solving skills. It should not be used to merely check the learning by rote capability.  47  • Special measures may be undertaken for the purposes of reducing the element of subjectivity in evaluation of students’ performance. It requires detailed guidelines from the point of view of ensuring both transparency and objectivity.  • There is a growing concern that autonomous colleges have great discrepancy between the internal and external assessments. This is a retrograde proposition and leads to a loss of confidence in the institution. It also creates handicaps to students of autonomous institutions when it comes to selection process for PG admissions since the internal mark is often not taken into account or recognized. In the first place, such a thing should not happen at all, but if it does happen it should be overcome by calibrating both the assessments.  • There is a fear of victimization of students by the faculty under their authority to exercise autonomy and internal evaluation. Steps must be taken to dispel this fear by introducing greater transparency in the system of evaluation and confidence among the students in the same.  D. Nomenclature of the Degree  • In awarding Degrees there should be a distinction drawn between the academic scope of a Degree and its nomenclature. Degrees are specified by UGC. The standardized nomenclature should be used but within brackets the institution can use its own specifications describing the scope of the Degree.  E. Recruitment of Staff  • Essential qualifications/eligibility laid down for the recruitment of teachers require a relook. The condition of qualifying NET be done away with for Ph.D. holders. However, NET examination may still be made compulsory for those who have not earned the Ph.D. Care may, however, be taken to maintain the quality of Ph.D. programmes.  • Institutions must be given the flexibility to adjust recruitment at various levels to the requirement of academic areas being offered for studies, provided there is no financial implication.  • Institutions are expected to adhere to norms of recruitment and promotion laid down by the regulatory bodies. The practice of sending observers from the regulatory bodies to oversee the selection process should be done away with.  • Institutions must be allowed to induct adequate technical support staff without which minimum standards of quality cannot be maintained.  • The periodic in-service training of teachers must be insisted upon. The scope for other training programmes apart from orientation and refresher courses must be taken into consideration for appropriate placement in the Career Advancement Scheme .  F. Teacher and Student Autonomy  • Teachers should be given the right to design their courses from conception to evaluation. If outside help (guest faculty, experts from industry and academia) is used, it may be done for specific and specialized units or modules.  • There should not be any rigidity in workload and timings of teachers as long as they deliver the results.  48  • Accountability for the completion and evaluation of the entire course must rest with the teacher concerned.  • Teachers’ should be allowed the highest level of intellectual freedom.  • Teachers’ roles may be redefined as facilitators of knowledge rather than dispensers of knowledge. The teacher should guide the student to seek, organize and manage knowledge  • Students should be encouraged to seek additional knowledge and they should be adequately credited for any segment of knowledge that they acquire through any agency.  • Credits should be given to students for any achievement relevant to their study and they should be motivated towards their all around development. Extra achievements (co curricular, extra curricular) should find adequate recognition in the assessment procedures. As already mentioned this should extend to even academic areas where a student may seek additional knowledge in a specified area of interest. This interest should be encouraged and recognized.  • Institutions should not insist on the minimum requirement of attendance to appear for an examination as long as the student displays good results.  G. Accountability  • Regular academic audit must become a permanent feature of every single autonomous institution.  • Students’ feedback should also be one of the vital parameters for academic audit.  • Inter-institutional collaboration cutting across the various sectors of education should be promoted with a view to sharing physical and human resources.  H. Constraints  • The conflicts between the institution and the state while implementing innovative programmes should be done away with. As long as the institutions are implementing their programmes in conformity with the guidelines of the regulatory bodies, the state should not interfere.  • The need of Endowment syndrome for new courses should be reviewed in favour of accepting bank guarantees.  • The institution should be given absolute autonomy for the implementation of its academic calendar, and programmes.  • Colleges with grant-in aid find it difficult to offer flexible electives due to stringent norms of the state government. They should be given a free hand to introduce elective courses with the explicit concurrence of the university.  • The ambience of autonomous colleges should promote independent thinking and independent work. To this end, it would be worthwhile to pool together the available resources and work for a common goal that would benefit teachers and students alike. This would also prevent wastage of resources or unnecessary duplication of material.  • Institutions should be given a free hand to create a consortium of institutions for the optimum utilization of both physical and human resources.  49  Chapter 6  Administrative Autonomy  Various aspects dealing with Administrative Autonomy in higher education were discussed in the Regional Workshops at Chennai (November 30th – 1st December, 2004), Pune (8th –9th December, 2004), Guwahati (28th –29th December, 2004) and Chandigarh (20th –21st January, 2005) under the Chairmanship of Prof. A. Gnanam, Former Vice-Chancellor, Pondicherry University; Lt. General (Dr.) M.A. Tutakne, Vice-Chancellor, Symbiosis Institute of Education and Culture; Prof. S. Sen, Vice-Chairman, West Bengal State Council for Higher Education; and Prof. A. Gnanam, Former Vice-Chancellor, Pondicherry University respectively. Each group deliberated at length on issues such as framework of institutional autonomy, common admission test, rational-fee structure, funds disbursing mechanism, modification of University Acts, role of regulatory bodies, internationalization of higher education, management of human and material resources, etc.  6.1 Scope of Administrative Autonomy  Although for operational reasons, CABE Committee discussed issues through parallel sessions dealing with academic, administrative and financial autonomy of higher education institutions, it is emphasized that the issues are interrelated and cannot be discussed in isolation. However, the deliberations consolidated in this Chapter focus mainly on the administrative aspects of the issue.  A general consensus is that the autonomy enjoyed by the universities is a limited one and even that varies from state to state and university to university. Efforts should be made to enlarge the scope of administrative autonomy of the universities starting from selection of the Vice-Chancellors to those of the teachers and others functionaries, including the constitution and functioning of various decision making bodies like the Court, Executive and Academic Council, etc. It might require appropriate amendments in the Statutes and Acts of individual institutions.Higher Education should not be made a prisoner of either bureaucracy or ideology. It must develop on the foundations of professional excellence and intellectual integrity. Administration in the present context is a process of providing men and material for the purpose of churning out students with exceptional qualities of head and heart.  Administrative autonomy should be a mechanism of coming together more in a participative way rather than by control. For the sake of administrative autonomy, the unit should be the college and that the colleges can come together to form universities. The College should have the autonomy to lay down most of the rules based on those laid down by a larger unit, that is, the university.  50  6.2 Basic Concerns for Administrative Autonomy  So far as the autonomy of colleges is concerned, it is clear that in most of the cases, autonomy enjoyed by the colleges is severely restricted in matters relating to selection of teachers, fixing of tuition fees, etc. The discussions were focused mainly on the mode of selection of teachers, functioning and constitution of the governing bodies, representation of the colleges in the academic and administrative bodies of the parent university, the concept of democracy vis-à-vis selection on merit of the head of the department, running of the self-financing courses, providing students with quality education and enough flexibilities in choosing their field of study and getting jobs commensurate with their qualifications.  The question of autonomy and accountability and the role of teachers in making an institution really autonomous and centre of excellence also formed part of the deliberations. General suggestions which emerged out of the deliberations are as under:  • The role of teacher in an academic institution was repeatedly highlighted and it was felt that unless the teachers play an active role and rise to the occasion and become the driving force of the system, asking for autonomy or some modification in the rules and regulations would be meaningless. Each institution has the right and obligation to become a centre of excellence and that excellence and autonomy only the teachers can ensure.  • A centralized Service Commission of higher education should be set up in each state for the appointment of teachers.  • Colleges should have adequate representation in the academic and administrative bodies of the universities.  • There is a need to reinvent the tools to be employed for the appraisal of teachers and the entire exercise should be taken very seriously.  • Principals should have more prominent role in Governing Bodies/Selection Committees, etc.  • Government should play a regulatory role specially in financial matters even for private and self-financing colleges so as to avoid commercialization of education..  • Full academic and administrative autonomy may be given to a few selected colleges imparting quality education in North East/Eastern Region, if necessary, by issuing ordinance.  • Administrative autonomy as enjoyed by the university should also be extended to autonomous colleges  • Opening of Study Centres by Deemed to be universities and other universities in other geographical areas should strictly be in conformity with the norms laid down by UGC.  6.3 Major Inferences Based on Discussions  A. Institutional Autonomy  Focussing on the institutional autonomy and not on individual autonomy, the group reiterated the Supreme court’s Judgement in the case of TMA Pai Foundation Vs. State of Karnataka. The Apex court has held that “the right to establish and administer educational institutions is guaranteed under the Constitution to all citizens under Article 19(1)(g) and 26, and to minorities specifically under Article 30.” The court further explained “the right to establish and administer educational institution broadly comprises of the following rights:  51  • to admit students;  • to set up a reasonable fee structure;  • to constitute a governing body;  • to appoint staff (teaching and non-teaching); and  • to take action if there is dereliction of duty on the part of any employee. The group agreed, in principle, that the above five points put together make an apt definition of autonomy and it should be recommended.  B. Common Admission Test  Several members strongly supported the idea of a Common Admission Test as it provides a common yardstick to gauge merits of various applicants coming from different backgrounds. They also reiterated the difficulties faced by applicants and their parents due to multiplicity of admission tests.  The opposing view was that it is not fair to risk the future of students to one or two examinations. A common admission test at National level also becomes an unwieldy exercise and since so much premium is put on just one examination, it also leads to malpractices. It was also suggested that a National Testing Service (NTS), along the lines of ETS in USA, must be established but it should be left to the institutions to interpret the outcomes of the tests conducted by NTS.  It was also said that any uniform prescription applied to all higher education institutions in such a vast country as ours is also going to put several institutions with special character in difficulty. As such there were so many divergent views on this issue and perhaps that is why the recent circular from the UGC inviting options to join Common Entrance Tests was appreciated by members as a very ‘balanced policy’. Members also pointed out that this issue invited severe judiciary interventions and the transparency of the process was the key issue before the courts.  C. Deciding Fee Structure  Several examples can be quoted where private institutions are charging exorbitant fees and exploiting the students and also the staff. Members also raised their concern that autonomy to raise fee may adversely affect access to higher education to some sections of the society. One of the factors responsible for poor quality of education at several universities is their bad financial position. Universities should be encouraged to generate resources so that they may function with good financial health. A strong mechanism of scholarships and educational loans (on the easiest possible terms), however, should be built so that no one is denied access to higher education due to economic reasons. Banks must also be encouraged by suitable incentives to grant educational loans and UGC and MHRD may also think of providing suitable security for study loans.  D. Fund Disbursing Agencies  It is understood that fund disbursing agencies do not appear to distribute tax payers money on an equitable basis. A small number of central universities and colleges consume large proportion of UGC funds whereas a miniscule proportion of funds gets divided amongst a large number of state universities and colleges.  Some state universities are known to experience difficulties in dealing with state governments on financial matters.  52  It was felt that the funding agencies, as per international practices, must exercise regulation and control before awarding the grant. But once it is sanctioned, it should be the prerogative of the institution how best to utilize the grant for the purpose for which it is sanctioned.  E. University Act  It was strongly felt that all institutions have different Acts and as such the Government has accepted different ways of functioning of higher education institutions based on their special character. These individual Acts and constitutions of various universities must be respected and there should not be any attempts to impose drab uniformity on all institutions. Some state university representatives, however, felt that their respective Acts come in the way of their exercising autonomy and there is a need for broader guidelines as to how a state university should function. The procedure to amend the Acts and Constitutions is rather cumbersome and time consuming and that it ought to be made easier.  F. Multiplicity of Regulatory Bodies  Multiplicity of regulating bodies at times leads to having conflicting expectations. This was particularly the case with the professional colleges which have to obtain ‘No Objection Certificate’ (NOC) from the state government, approval from regulating bodies such as AICTE, NCTE, etc., affiliation from a state university and conform to general principles such as pay-scales laid down by UGC.  Some concerns were also raised about the functioning of the statutory regulating bodies and the need to redefine their working so as not to interfere with the autonomy of higher education institutions.  G. Internationalization of Higher Education  The groups also deliberated on the issue of internationalization of higher education and the need for appropriate framework for universities to take advantage of ‘Export of Higher Education.’ The latest circular from UGC that prior permission for entering into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with foreign institution is not required is appreciated. The groups also appreciated the UGC’s initiative of ‘Promoting Indian Higher Education Abroad’. Members, however, raised concern that several other aspects such as hosting foreign students in a campus continue to be a tedious and difficult exercise.  H. Ratio of Teaching to Non Teaching Staff  The ratio of teaching to non-teaching staff in institutions of higher learning, in certain cases, has reached an alarming stage. In some case, it is as high as 1:5. This ratio certainly needs to be brought down to the level of 1:1.5 as recommended by UGC following a logical progression.  I. Engaging Student Community  Universities should encourage participation of student community in routine administrative tasks thereby allowing them an opportunity to earn part of their fees and at the same time acquire skills which would help them eventually in their career. ‘Earn while you learn’ programmes are very common in some countries. Some members shared their experiences that it has already started happening in some universities and colleges with heavy participation from women.  53  J. Autonomy and Financial Dependence  If the institutions want to be fully autonomous they must not be entirely dependent on Government funds. Time has come when institutions must strive to generate their own resources for better self-reliance and for improvement in the infrastructure requirements that are becoming all the more demanding in the knowledge era. Nonetheless, institutions should continue to receive assistance from the state. However, institutions which generate their own resources must be encouraged by providing them some incentive package.  K. Material Resource Management  As regards the administration for material resource management, the same pattern of governance designed for human resource management could be followed, that is, broad guidelines could be provided by an Accrediting Agency at the National level, but at the local level it should be the governing body which should evolve transparent, unambiguous guidelines, rules and regulations for implementation. The principle of democracy should be upheld at all costs but decision should be taken by as few people as possible both for intent and understanding.  L. Administrative Matters  Some of the important suggestions regarding administrative matters emanating out of the discussion are given as under:  • Education providers need to be treated as partners and not as controllers.  • Statute making powers should rest with the universities and they need not be referred to the Governor for approval.  • All guidelines should emanate from within the institutions.  • All provisions to interfere with appointment of key functionaries should be withdrawn.  • A state level standing tribunal should be the appellate authority for all contentions.  • Administrative audit should replace regulations.  • Co-ordination and determination of standards by the Centre should be restricted to inter-state levels and not at the institutional level.  M. Restoring Autonomy  Deliberations on the issue of restoration of autonomy centred around the following:  • Centralized controls may be discontinued.  • Freedom to design academic programme may be restored in order to meet the societal needs.  • Freedom may be given to individual institutions to expand in those areas where they have the real potential.  • Freedom to set standards and procedures for student admission may be given to institutions.  • Tuition and other fees should also be determined by individual institutions.  • The power of affiliation of a college should vest with the university concerned.  • Ideally research fellowship should be part of block grant. It should be determined on the research strength, diversity and standing. Distribution of fellowships among the departments should be left to the institution.  54  • Public institutions should work towards the Golden ratio of 40-50% of the annual budget from government grants, 25-30% from fees and the rest from endowments.  • Development grants should be linked to the size of the annual budget and also with academic audit reports.  N. Institutionalizing Regulatory Provisions  Some suggestions regarding institutionalizing regulatory provisions emerged from the deliberations as follows:  • Independent national quality assurance bodies specializing in institutional and programme reviews could assess the effectiveness of the proposed autonomy.  • It so happens that Vice-Chancellors fight for autonomy but don’t delegate the same to the Departments or Colleges. The real autonomy warrants that it should percolate down to the lowest rung.  • Regulatory bodies may be done away with; alternate models of management structure may be suggested.  • Non-academicians should not be members of various educational bodies.  • Quality education be provided at an affordable cost. There should not be any fixation of a common fee; it should, however, be based on the nature of the courses.  • Grievance redressal mechanism should be made mandatory for all institutions.  55  Chapter 7  Financial Autonomy  Various aspects dealing with Financial Autonomy in higher education institutions were discussed in the Regional workshops at Chennai (November 30th – 1st December, 2004), Pune (8th-9th December, 2004), Guwahati (28th – 29th December, 2004) and Chandigarh (20th – 21st January, 2005) under the Chairmanship of Prof. P.V. Indiresan, Former Director, Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai; Prof Mool Chand Sharma, Vice-Chancellor, National Law Institute University, Bhopal and Prof. Gyanendra Singh, Vice-Chancellor, Mahatma Gandhi Chitrakoot Gramodaya Vishwavidyalay, Satna; Prof. P.K. Saha, Vice-Chancellor, University of North Bengal, Rajarammohanpur, Darjeeling; Shri Vishnu Bhagwan, Vice-Chancellor, Guru Jambeshwar University, Hisar respectively. Each group deliberated at length on issues such as general and financial guidelines; financial assistance from state, UGC and other agencies, fee structure, fund generation, fund utilization and audits, and other related issues which have a bearing on financial autonomy.  7.1 Scope of Financial Autonomy  Economic reforms have made a tremendous impact on all spheres of life, and education sector, especially higher education, is no exception in experiencing the impact of such reforms. Without financial autonomy no other autonomy is possible.  Issues related to Financial Autonomy of higher education institutions range from the understanding of its conceptual framework to the modalities of its operationalization. The role of state funding needs to be understood in terms of state control which has implications for infringing upon the autonomy of universities and higher education institutions. Also the state funding for higher education would assume greater significance in the coming years due to challenges and opportunities posed by globalization and privatization. There is a conscious concern that in no case the dependence of higher education institutions on state funding should become their bondage to the state administration.  It is felt that the state governments should provide financial support only for salary and related benefits in higher education institutions. In the event of non-availability of government grants, the approved posts of teachers and other staff remain vacant, and in some cases even salary payments get delayed for varying amounts of time. The higher education institutions get no grant for developmental programmes, except the limited grants from UGC during the plan periods. The state should devise a mechanism for adequate funding of higher education institutions and ensure them all possible autonomy for utilization of funds made available.  It remains a concern whether full financial autonomy would at all be possible for the higher education institutions. Different committees set up earlier, namely Gnanam committee and Soneri Committee had recommended that financial autonomy should be considered as an essential prerequisite for ensuring academic excellence and  56  development. It is at times advocated that the higher education institutions should decide their own course of action for income and expenditure, but shall be accountable to funding agencies including the state government and UGC subject to audit rules. In fact, no control would be desirable either to augment the income from multiple sources or to expenditure in terms of budget provision. Even the authority for re-appropriation of budget heads of accounts should be vested with the higher education institutions as and when the financial functioning of the institutions so required.  7.2 Basic Concerns for Financial Autonomy  Whether the course fees could be raised unilaterally or whether any higher salary scales could be paid to the faculty or staff members by the self-financed institutions, the consensus was that such issues be resolved by an appropriate authority or the court of law. In principle, there should not be any interference with the self-financed institutions thereby infringing their authority. But as educational institutions deem to have social objectives, the profit making motives should be curtailed and there could be social control, if not legislative or legal bindings.  Self-sustenance vis-à-vis financial autonomy could be achieved through quality education. The universities could be considered as hubs of resource persons, the expertise of whom could be utilized in generating resources for the universities. There would be many opportunities in the coming years wherein both the faculty members participating in the programmes and the higher education institutions could benefit substantially. A case in instance is the University of North Bengal which had been successful in raising its own income nearly ten folds within a span of five years since 1999-2000. With generation of income through various programmes, the higher education institutions would enjoy more freedom, and not be subjected to the control of expenditure for development by any agency.This raises the question whether it would mean a gradual decline of financial support from the state. It is felt that public/state funding would remain dominant corpus of fund for management and development of higher education. But self-financed programmes by higher education institutions would be catalytic in achieving success in the competitive market in the context of globalization and privatization. The view that the financial autonomy of higher education institutions should have the other face namely accountability would have a social perspective committed to people in general.The pertinent question is how to define the role of the state in assessing the fiscal need of higher education institutions and granting financial autonomy to such institutions. A suggestion could be that a Finance Commission of higher education may be set up at the state level to assess the requirement of higher education institutions and grant financial autonomy to these institutions. The state would contribute the grant to higher education institutions as recommended by the Finance Commission but in no way should interfere with the autonomy of such institutions to utilize the grants for the intended purposes.  Finance always involves two major aspects namely revenue and expenditure. Major part of the expenditure of an institution is salary for teachers and non-teaching staff members, besides incidental expenses. Of these components, average salary of a teacher could be taken as an indicator for planning the financial budget. Based on this parameter and the statistics given by the Head of a self-financing institution, financial costs for running courses in the disciplines of Arts, Sciences, Engineering and Medicine are estimated roughly to be of one month’s salary of a teacher for arts, one and a half month’s salary of a teacher for sciences, two months salary of a teacher for engineering and 10 times more than the average monthly salary of a teacher for medicine. Keeping this estimate in  57  view, funds are to be generated, operated and disbursed within the norms framed by the institution and accepted by their Management Committees.  Sources for generating the funds  Various sources for generating funds for higher education institution may be mentioned as under:  • Fees (both special fee and tuition fee) be collected from the students.  • Creation of endowments  • Corpus fund be generated  • Grants be obtained  • Alummi be contacted for raising funds  • Special courses be offered  • Projects or consultancy service be undertaken  • User charges (like hostel bills) be collected  • Cess  • Donations  • Setting up of funding agencies  Revenue Utilization  The revenue that is obtained from various sources may be utilized for the following purposes:  • salaries for teaching and non teaching staff members  • maintenance of the institution especially with regard to the physical environment  • academic exercises to be carried out in the library (for purchase of books, journals, periodicals etc.), laboratory (purchase of required materials including computer, etc.)  • extra curricular activities sending students for participation in competitions.  • travel grants for teachers to participate in conferences, seminars, etc.  • Social and family welfare of teachers like meeting the medical expenses, educational expenses for one’s family  • Student welfare, such as scholarship be offered to economically backward and meritorious students, medals be instituted for toppers in academics, etc.  • Hostels be built and maintained  • Quality improvement in overall functioning of the institution  • Capital development as required There should be periodic changes to match increase in salaries and other costs; wherever possible services could be out sourced and insourced as well.  Aspects Related to Fees  In case of aided institutions, special fees, tuition fee be fixed by the government with marginal revision being done every year. Special fees which are collected, are not to be deposited as consolidated fund, but may be  58  operated by the colleges themselves. The principal or the head of the institution may constitute a committee to monitor the operation with regard to utilization of these funds. Even in the government institutions, utilization of funds other than wages may be left to the discretion of local institutions, subject to internal audit and rules framed by the institutions duly approved by the government. The government need not direct but can inspect the financial operations of the institutions. With regard to the unaided or self-financing institutions an advisory committee with representatives of the government and UGC may periodically fix the rate of fees and other charges. Affiliation fees payable to the University may be waived after predetermined period of time.  As competition in the years to come is going to be rather stiff and likely to become progressively more especially when foreign institutions are going to enter the Indian market, due preparations for meeting such a challenge will have to be made well in advance based on careful planning. India should be proactive and Indian institutions could admit foreign students with a different fee structure for various courses, subject to security restrictions.  7.3 Major Inferences Based on Discussions  The deliberations on Financial Autonomy of higher education institutions referred to the following:  A. Allocation of funds for higher education  • The present level of 6% to 7% intake is too small. The system should ensure 20% of youth in higher education and further explore UNESCO’s call of massification of higher education.  • The national commitment of NPE-1968/1986/1992 with regard to allocation of 6% of GDP for education be implemented in the Union Budget, 2006. Increase in GDP over the years should further facilitate education by increasing allocation. At least 2% of GDP should be spent on higher education.  • The present structure of Grant-in-aid by the Government should be continued and revised from time to time taking into account the price index and the reasonable percentage of GDP for education.  • A representation be made through U.G.C. to the Planning Commission to increase the share of grant for education both in the State and National plan outlay upto 8% which has never been more than 4%.  • The system of ‘block grant’ be introduced and autonomy be given to UGC to utilise it by establishing its own norms. The same system be made applicable for funds from UGC to universities. On similar lines ‘block grants’ system be adopted in respect of grants from state government to colleges based on the budget heads and standard practices of accountability.  • Imbalances in funding by UGC for central universities and state universities be rectified . UGC must get much higher allocation from Union Government. The colleges be supported with more development grants.  • The mismatch between the self-generated income and UGC’s schemes of matching grants be modified. Generation of resources be encouraged. Upper limit should go from the existing 25% to 50% as grant for revenue generated.  • More institutes be brought under the purview of UGC grants under sections 2(f) and 12 B of UGC Act. The present number of institutions getting UGC funds is small.  • The CABE, MHRD, UGC and other concerned bodies should go into the details of the possible educational, economic, cultural impact of GATS on the nation.  59  • The fund to the tune of 0.1% from the funds of user ministry be provided directly to the UGC/AICTE.  • Judicial verdicts also mandate that educational institutes are not to be run for profit. Increasing commodification and subsequent denial of access to quality education for all young people is deleterious to the health of the nation. Education is a merit good and be promoted to achieve social equity.  • Practices such as declining state-support, freezing of grants, freezing of sanctioned posts, reduction in teaching and non-teaching posts, governments directives against filling posts, contractualization of appointments are highly deleterious to equity and quality. State-funded education system should be strengthened.  B. Disbursement of Funds  • The State should provide block grant based on objective criteria to meet the requirements of higher education institutions as determined by the State Finance Commission on higher education. A State Finance Commission for higher education should be set up for the purpose. The Central Government through UGC should provide adequate financial support to this Commission.  • Bureaucratic riders at all levels be removed. UGC procedure for disbursement of grants and their utilization be simplified and grants be disbursed expeditiously.  • Funds given by UGC could be released on time, that too in the beginning of every academic year. Freedom must be given to incur expenditure on relevant items. Flexibility for utilizing funds under any approved head must be allowed and transfer of funds across different grant heads may also be permitted. Institutions should have a finance committee to allocate and monitor funds for various activities.  C. Resource Generation  • Higher Education Institutions should strive to generate additional income for growth and development from multiple sources as there is no other option in the market economy of price escalation  • Resource mobilization through university system and industry interface should be encouraged. Resources from all possible sectors be explored by the institutions.  • Autonomous institutions should be allowed to raise additional funds through legal and ethical means and there should be a flexible system of accountability.  • In view of privatization and globalization, the colleges and universities should become competitive by raising quality for which they may explore avenues like tie-up with industries, global organisations, professional bodies, etc.  D. Fee Structure / Scholarships and Freeships  • Higher Education Institutions should have the authority to fix and collect various fees from students and other beneficiaries without any interference from the state. The democratization of authority in higher education institutions will protect the interest of stakeholders in devising a rational and sustainable fee structure.  • Differential fee structure for various income groups may be desirable instead of uniform fee structure for a particular course. Economically backward students may pay reduced fee in conformity with lower income of their parents/guardians.  60