VOL I: GENERAL PROBLEMS  EDUCATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT  REPORT OF THE EDUCATION COMMISSION, 1964-66  NATIONAL COUNCIL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH AND TRAINING 1970  First Edition 1966 Reprint Edition May 1970  Vaisakkha 1892 © Ministry of Education, 1966  Reprinted by the National Council of Educational Research and Training with the permission of the Ministry of Education and Youth Services, Government of India  Rs. 11.00 18 s. $2.20  TEXT SET IN 12 PT. BEMBO TYPE AND PRINTED  ON CREAM WOVE INDIAN PAPER 73 GSM  Published at the Publication Unit by S.A. Abidin, Secretary, National Council of Educational Research and Training, NIE Campus, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 16, and printed at Sree Saraswaty Press Ltd., Cacutta 9  ii  New Delhi  29 June 1966  Asadha 8, 1888  Dear Shri Chagla,  I have much pleasure in submitting the Report of the Education Commission.  I would like to take this occasion to express to you my own and my colleagues' sincere gratitude for the support and encouragement you have always so generously extended to us in our work. The appointment of the Commission is largely due to your initiative and vision.  Education has always been important but perhaps never more so in man's history than today. In a science-based world, education and research are crucial to the entire developmental process of a country, its welfare, progress and security. It is characteristic of a world permeated by science that in some essential ways the future shape of things is unpredictable. This emphasizes all the more the need for an educational policy which contains a built-in flexibility so that it can adjust to changing circumstances. It underscores the importance of experimentation and innovation. If I may say so, the single most important thing needed now is to get out of the rigidity of the present system. In the rapidly changing world of today, one thing is certain: yesterday's educational system will not meet today's, and even less so, the need of tomorrow.  It is difficult, and it is certainly so for us, to say to what extent the Report will actually help in the reconstruction of the educational system which is so urgently necessary. We trust, however, that the Report will provide some basic thinking and framework for taking at least the first step towards bringing about what may be called an educational revolution in the country. The Report makes recommendations about various sectors and aspects of education. The main points that immediately come to my mind are:  Introduction of work-experience (which includes manual work, production experience, etc.) and social service as integral parts of general education at more or less all levels of education;  iii  Stress on moral education and inculcation of a sense of social responsibility. Schools should recognize their responsibility in facilitating the transition of youth from the world of school to the world of work and life;  Vocationalization of secondary education;  The strengthening of centres of advanced study and the setting up of a small number of major universities which would aim to achieve the highest international standards;  Special emphasis on the training and quality of teachers for schools; Education for agriculture and research in agriculture and allied sciences should be given a high priority in the scheme of educational reconstruction. Energetic and imaginative steps are required to draw a reasonable proportion of talent to go in for advanced study and research in the agricultural sciences;  Development of quality or pace-setting institutions at all stages and in all sectors.  I apologize for the size of the Report. It could have been shorter, but that would have cost more money and time, and delayed action. What the situation urgently calls for is action, and this is what you have always stressed.  With regards,  Yours sincerely,  D. S. KOTHARI  SHRI M. C. CHAGLA  Minister for Education  Government of India  New Delhi  iv  MEMBERS OF THE EDUCATION COMMISSION  Chairman  1. PROFESSOR D. S. KOTHARI, Chairman, University Grants Commission, New Delhi.  Members  2. Sum A. R. DAWOOD, formerly Officiating Director, Directorate of Extension Programmes for Secondary Education, New Delhi.  3. MR. H. L. ELVIN, Director, Institute of Education, University of London, London.  4. SHRI R. A. GOPALASWAMI, Director, Institute of Applied Manpower Research. New Delhi (since retired).  5. PROFESSOR SADATOSHI IHARA, School of Science and Engineering, Waseda University, Tokyo.  6. DR. V. S. JHA, formerly Director of the Commonwealth Education Liaison Unit, London.  7. SHRI P. N. KIRPAL, Educational Adviser and Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Education, New Delhi.  8. PROFESSOR M. V. MATHUR, Professor of Economics and Public Administration, University of Rajasthan, Jaipur (now Vice-Chancellor, Rajasthan University).  9. DR. B. P. PAL, Director, Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi (now Director-General, and Vice-President, Indian Council of Agricultural Research and Additional Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Food and Agriculture).  10. KUMARI S. PANANDIKAR, Head of the Department of Education, Karnatak 'University, Dharwar (since retired).  11. PROFESSOR ROGER REVELLE, Director, Centre for Population Studies, Harvard School of Public Health, Harvard University, Cambridge, USA.  12. DR. K. G. SAIYIDAIN, former Educational Adviser to the Government of India (now Director, Asian Institute of Educational Planning and Administration, New Delhi).  13. DR. T. SEN, Vice-Chancellor, Jadavpur University, Calcutta.  v  14. PROFESSOR S. A. SHUMOVSKY, Director, Methodological Division, Ministry of Higher and Special Secondary Education, RSFSR, and Professor of Physics, Moscow University, Moscow.  15. M. JEAN THOMAS, Inspector-General of Education, France, and formerly Assistant Director-General of UNESCO, Paris. Member-Secretary  16. SHRI J. P. NAIK, Head of the Department of Educational Planning, Administration and Finance, Gokhale Institute of Politics and Economics, Poona.  Associate Secretary  17. MR. J. F. MCDOUGALL, Assistant Director, Department of School and Higher Education, UNESCO, Paris.  vi  FOREWORD  The Education Commission was appointed by the Government of India by a Resolution, dated 14 July 1964, to advise the Government on the national pattern of education and on the general principles and policies for the development of education at all stages and in all aspects.*  We began our task twenty-one months ago, on October 2, 1964, Mahatma Gandhi's birthday. From the very beginning we have been conscious of the immensity and inherent difficulties of the task assigned to us. No task in our view could be more challenging, more vital and relevant to India's progress and development-economic, cultural and spiritual. In facing a task of such colossal magnitude and complexity, there is always a danger that the approach and recommendations may not be sufficiently radical. There is also the other possibility that the recommendations may go beyond the capacity and resources of the nation. The difficulties are greatly accentuated because educational plans are long-term plans, and long-term projections of needs and resources are beset with serious uncertainties. We hope our assumptions about the total resources of the nation over the next 20 years and the proportion to be invested in education are reasonable.  It cannot be gainsaid that the recommendations are inevitably circumscribed by the limits of our knowledge and experience, and by our capacity for bold, constructive and imaginative thinking. We would not claim that the recommendations made by us in the Report are necessarily the best, nor can we be completely certain about the validity of every recommendation that we have made. Again, many of the proposals we make would require investigation and revision in the light of experience. We therefore, lay considerable emphasis on a built-in flexibility in the system of education to facilitate adjustment to changing situations and requirements. There is, of course, one thing about which we feel no doubt or hesitation: education, science-based and in coherence with Indian culture and values, can alone provide the foundation-as also the instrument-for the nation's progress, security and welfare.  Indian education needs a drastic reconstruction, almost a revolution. We need to bring, about major improvement in the effectiveness of primary education; to introduce work experience as an integral element of general education; to vocationalize secondary education; to improve the quality of teachers at all levels and to provide teachers in sufficient strength; to liquidate illiteracy; to strengthen centres of advanced study and  *Legal and medical education were excluded from the purview of the Commission, but it was authorized to look into "such aspects of these problems as are necessary for its comprehensive enquiries".  vii  strive to attain, in some of our universities at least, higher international standards; to lay special emphasis on the combination of teaching and research; and to pay particular attention to education and research in agriculture and allied sciences. All this calls for a determined and large-scale action. Tinkering with the existing situation and moving forward with faltering steps and lack of faith can make things worse than before.  In view of the urgency of the situation, we felt impelled to keep the time-table originally set for the submission of the Report, even if it meant some limitations on the scope of our studies and on the depth and perspicacity of our presentation. If we had more time, the Report could have been shorter and more readable.  The Commission set up twelve Task Forces on (1) School Education; (2) Higher Education; (3) Technical Education; (4) Agricultural Education; (5) Adult Education; (6) Science Education and Research; (7) Teacher Training and Teacher Status; (8) Student Welfare; (9) New Techniques and Methods; (10) Manpower; (11) Educational Administration; and (12) Educational Finance. In addition, it set up seven Working Groups on (1) Women's Education; (2) Education of Backward Classes; (3) School Buildings; (4) School-Community Relations; (5) Statistics; (6) Pre-Primary Education; and (7) School Curriculum. The Task Forces and the Working Groups made a detailed study of many specific problems. Some of these studies will be published separately. The Reports of the Task Forces and the Working Groups have been of great help to us in our work and have enabled us to examine some of the important issues in a depth and detail which would not have been possible otherwise.  We spent about one hundred days in going round all the States and some Union Territories. We visited universities, Colleges and schools and held discussions with teachers, educationists, administrators and students. We convened two conferences of university students' representatives to have the advantage of personal discussion with them about student welfare and discipline. We found these conferences of real value.  We interviewed men and women distinguished in public life, scientists, industrialists and scholars in different fields and others interested in education. Altogether we interviewed about 9,000 persons. We invited written evidence, memoranda and replies to our questionnaires, organized seminars and conferences, commissioned a number of special studies and also conducted a few special enquiries such as the socio economic background of students admitted to educational institutions, and working days in schools and colleges. The total number of memoranda and notes sent to the Commission was over 2,400.  We had the benefit of valuable consultations with a number of internationally well known educationists and scientists. We are particularly grateful to Prof P. M. S. Blackett, President of the Royal Society, UK; Lord Robbins, Chairman of the Committee on Higher Education (1961-63), UK; Sir Christopher Cox, Educational Adviser, Ministry of Overseas Development, UK; Sir Willis Jackson, Professor of Electrical Engineering, Imperial College of Science and Technology, University of London; Professor C. A. Moser, London School of Economics; Professor Frederick Spitz, President, National  viii  Academy of Sciences, USA; Dr. James E. Allen Jr., Commissioner, State Education Department and President, University of the State of New York, USA; Professor Edward Shils, University of Chicago, USA; Professor S. Dedijer, University of Lund, Sweden; Recteur J. Capelle, formerly Director-General of Education in France; Professor C. E. Beeby, Harvard University; and Academician A. D. Alexandrov, Rector, University of Leningrad; and Academician O. A. Reutov, Academy of Sciences, USSR.  We had the honour and privilege of meetings with the President, the Vice-President and the Prime Minister. We had most useful discussions with the Minister for Education and some of his Cabinet colleagues and with the Deputy Chairman, Member (Education) and some other members of the Planning Commission. During our visits to the States, the Chief Ministers and Education Ministers as also their colleagues gave us their time generously. Discussions with them were of great value and benefit to us. We had useful discussions with the Secretaries to State Governments concerned with Education, Local Government, Agriculture and Finance. We also had most useful meetings with a large number of educationists, scientists, the President of the Indian National Congress, Members of Parliament and State Legislatures, industrialists and journalists. To all of them, we are deeply grateful.  In setting up the Commission, the Government of India decided to associate with it a number of distinguished educationists and scientists from other countries. Professors H. L. Elvin (UK), jean Thomas (France), Roger Revelle (USA), S. A. Shumovsky (USSR) and Sadatoshi Ihara (Japan) served as full members of the Commission. Mr. J. F. McDougall (UNESCO Secretariat) served as Associate Secretary throughout the work of the Commission. The Indian members of the Commission would like to record their deep gratitude to the foreign members and to the Associate Secretary. It has enabled us to add considerably to our expertise and insight. While the foreign members have been fully and wholeheartedly associated with the work of the Commission and with the general trend of its conclusions, the responsibility rests primarily with the Indian members in cases where we make recommendations pertaining specifically to Indian problems.  Our Report is divided into three parts.  The first part covers Chapters I-VI. It deals with general aspects of educational reconstruction common to all stages and sectors of education. These include reorientation of the educational system to national objectives, structural reorganization, improvement of teachers, enrolment policies and equalization of educational opportunity.  The second part covers Chapters VII-XVII. It deals with the different stages and sectors of education. Chapters VII-X deal with some aspects of school education such as problems of expansion, curriculum, teaching methods, textbooks, guidance, evaluation, administration and supervision. Chapters XI-XIII deal with problems of higher education which include, amongst others, the establishment of major universities, programmes of qualitative improvement, enrolment and university governance. Chapters XIV and XV deal respectively with education for agriculture and technical and vocational education.  ix  Chapter XVI discusses programmes of science education and research. Chapter XVII deals with problems of adult education.  The third part deals with problems of implementation. It covers two chapters-Chapter XVIII which deals with educational planning and administration and Chapter XIX which deals with educational finance. We realize that many of the things we say here have been said before, notably by the University Education Commission (1948-49). It is worth recalling, for instance, that the Commission laid great stress on education for agriculture and its improvement, yet nothing significant happened. The real need is action. The poignancy of the situation and the grim times we are passing through underscore this simple but vital fact.  We record our gratitude to the State Governments for their generous cooperation in our work through organizing our visits, making the time of busy senior officials fully available to us, readily answering all our questions, preparing memoranda on their educational progress and problems, opening their institutions to our visits and for their hospitality in making our stay in their States useful and pleasant in every way.  We thank the members of our Task Forces and Working Groups and the Secretary, UGC, for their most willing and devoted efforts to deal with complex problems in a realistic and professional manner. Theirs has been a contribution of inestimable value. We are equally grateful to all those who have given evidence, sent memoranda, replied to the questionnaires, and discussion papers and participated in seminars and conferences and given us the privilege of visiting their institutions.  We thank the agencies which carried out special studies and enquiries for us and in particular the National Council of Educational Research and Training, the Institute of Applied Manpower Research, the Indian Law Institute, the State Institutes of Education, and the several Teachers' Associations. These added background to our enquiries which we otherwise would have lacked.  Many educational institutions collaborated in a number of special enquiries which the Secretariat of the Commission carried out. Many more opened their doors to our visits and provided the time and experience of their staff to our discussions. We express our gratitude to all of them.  We owe a special debt to the UGC and the Indian Institute of Public Administration who, at considerable inconvenience to themselves, provided us with the necessary accommodation.  It is a pleasure to record our thanks to the UNESCO, the British Council and the USAID for the services of members and consultants and to the Asia Foundation for a gift of books. We have to thank also the UNESCO International Institute of Educational Planning and the Governments of France, the Federal Republic of Germany and the USSR for financial and other assistance to our team which went abroad for comparative studies.  x  We thank our Secretariat for their selfless and devoted collaboration. A particular word of thanks goes here to the State Liaison Officers for their unstinted help.  We cannot conclude our acknowledgements without expressing our indebtedness to Shri J. P. Naik, Member-Secretary of the Commission. His unrivalled knowledge of educational problems and statistics and his indefatigable energy have been a source of unfailing strength and inspiration; and we owe more to him than to any one else that the work of the Commission could be brought to completion within the allotted time.  We are grateful to Mr. J. F. Mc Dougall, Associate Secretary of the Commission, for his assistance at all stages of our work.  xi  NATIONAL POLICY ON EDUCATION  The Resolution issued by the Government of India on the Report of the Education Commission is reproduced below for ready reference.  Education has always been accorded an honoured place in Indian society. The great leaders of the Indian freedom movement realized the fundamental role of education and throughout the nation's struggle for independence, stressed its unique significance for national development. Gandhiji formulated the scheme of Basic Education seeking to harmonize intellectual and manual work. This was a great step forward in making education directly relevant to the life of the people. Many other national leaders likewise made important contributions to national education before independence.  2. In the post Independence period, a major concern of the Government of India and of the States has been to give increasing attention to education as a factor vital to national progress and security. Problems of educational reconstruction were reviewed by several commissions and committees, notably the University Education Commission (1948-49) and the Secondary Education Commission (1952-53). Some steps to implement the recommendations of these Commissions were taken; and with the passing of the Resolution on Scientific Policy under the leadership of Jawaharlal Nehru, the development of science, technology and scientific research received special emphasis. Towards the end of the Third Five Year Plan, a need was felt to hold a comprehensive review of the educational system with a view to initiating a fresh and more determined effort at educational reconstruction; and the Education Commission (1964-66) was appointed to advise the Government on the national pattern of education and on the general principles and policies for the development of education at all stages and in all aspects". The Report of the Education Commission has since been widely discussed and commented upon. The Government is happy to note that a general consensus on the national policy on education has emerged in the course of these discussions.  3. The Government of India is convinced that a radical reconstruction of education on the broad lines recommended by the Education Commission is essential for economic and cultural development of the country, for national integration and for realizing the ideal of a socialistic pattern of society. This will involve a trans formation of the system to relate it more closely to the life of the people; a continuous effort to expand educational opportunity; a sustained and intensive effort to raise the quality of education at all stages; an emphasis on the development of science and technology; and the cultivation of moral and social values. The educational system must produce young men and women of character and ability committed to national service and development. Only then will education be able to play its vital role in promoting national progress, creating a sense of common citizenship and culture, and strengthening national integration. This is necessary if the country is to attain its rightful place in the comity of nations in conformity with its great cultural heritage and its unique potentialities.  xii  4. The Government of India accordingly resolves to promote the development of education in the country in accordance with the following principles:  (1) Free and Compulsory Education  Strenuous efforts should be made for the early fulfillment of the Directive Principle under Article 45 of the Constitution seeking to provide free and compulsory education for all children up to the age of 14. Suitable programmes should be developed to reduce the prevailing wastage and stagnation in schools and to ensure that every child who is enrolled in school successfully completes the prescribed course.  (2) Status, Emoluments and Education of Teachers  (a) Of all factors which determine the quality of education and its contribution to national development, the teacher is undoubtedly the most important. It is on his personal qualities and character, his educational qualifications and professional competence that the success of all educational endeavour must ultimately depend. Teachers must, therefore, be accorded an honoured place in society. Their emoluments and other service conditions should be adequate and satisfactory, having regard to their qualifications and responsibilities.  (b) The academic freedom of teachers to pursue and publish independent studies and researches and to speak and write about significant national and international issues should be protected.  (c) Teacher education, particularly in-service education, should receive due emphasis.  (3) Development of Languages (a) Regional Languages: The energetic development of Indian languages and literature is a sine qua non for educational and cultural development. Unless this is done, the creative energies of the people will not be released, standards of education will not improve, knowledge will not spread to the people, and the gulf between the intelligentsia and the masses will remain, if not widen further. The regional languages are already in use as media of education at the primary and secondary stages. Urgent steps should now be taken to adopt them as media of education at the university stage.  (b) Three-Language Formula: At the secondary stage, the State Governments should adopt, and vigorously implement, the three-language formula which 'includes the study of a modern Indian language, preferably one of the southern languages, apart from Hindi and English in the Hindi-speaking States, and of Hindi along with the regional language and English in the non-Hindi speaking States. Suitable courses in Hindi and/or English should also be available in universities and colleges with a view to improving the proficiency of students in these languages up to the prescribed university standards.  (c) Hindi: Every effort should be made to promote the development of Hindi. In developing Hindi as the link language, due care should be taken to ensure that it will  xiii  serve, as provided for in Article 351 of the Constitution, as a medium of expression for all the elements of the composite culture of India. The establishment in non-Hindi States, of colleges and other institutions of higher education which use Hindi as the medium of education should be encouraged.  (d) Sanskrit : Considering the special importance of Sanskrit to the growth and development of Indian languages and its unique contribution to the cultural unity of the country, facilities for its teaching at the school and university stages should be offered on a more liberal scale. Development of new methods of teaching the language should be encouraged, and the possibility explored of including the study of Sanskrit in those courses (such as modern Indian languages, ancient Indian history, Indology and Indian philosophy) at the first and second degree stages, where such knowledge is useful.  (e) International Languages: Special emphasis needs to be laid on the study of English and other international languages. World knowledge is growing at a tremendous pace, especially in science and technology. India must not only keep up this growth but should also make her own significant contribution to it. For this purpose, study of English deserves to be specially strengthened.  (4) Equalization of Educational Opportunity Strenuous efforts should be made to equalize educational opportunity. (a) Regional imbalances in the provision of educational facilities should be corrected and good educational facilities should be provided in rural and other backward areas.  (b) To promote social cohesion and national integration the Common School System as recommended by the Education Commission should be adopted. Efforts should be made to improve the standard of education in general schools. All special schools like Public Schools should be required to admit students on the basis of merit and also to provide a prescribed proportion of free-studentships to prevent segregation of social classes. This will not, however, affect the rights of minorities under Article 30 of the Constitution.  (c) The education of girls should receive emphasis, not only on grounds of social justice, but also because it accelerates social transformation.  (d) More intensive efforts are needed to develop education among the backward classes and especially among the tribal people.  (e) Educational facilities for the physically and mentally handicapped children should be expanded and attempts should be made to develop integrated programmes enabling the handicapped children to study in regular schools.  (5) Identification of Talent  For the cultivation of excellence, it is necessary that talent in diverse fields should be identified at as early an age as possible, and every stimulus and opportunity given for its full development.  xiv  (6) Work-experience and National Service  The school and the community should be brought closer through suitable programmes of mutual service and support. Work-experience and national service, including participation in meaningful and challenging programmes of community service and national reconstruction, should accordingly become an integral part of education. Emphasis in these programmes should be on self-help, character formation and on developing a sense of social commitment.  (7) Science Education and Research  With a view to accelerating the growth of the national economy, science education and research should receive high priority. Science and mathematics should be an integral part of general education till the end of the school stage.  (8) Education for Agriculture and Industry  Special emphasis should be placed on the development of education for agriculture and industry.  (a) There should be at least one agricultural university in every State. These should, as far as possible, be single campus universities; but where necessary, they may have constituent colleges on different campuses. Other universities may also be assisted, where the necessary potential exists, to develop strong departments for the study of one or more aspects of agriculture.  (b) In technical education, practical training in industry should form an integral part of such education. Technical education and research should be related closely to industry, encouraging the flow of personnel both ways and providing for continuous cooperation in the provision, design and periodical review of training programmes and facilities.  (c) There should be a continuous review of the agricultural, industrial and other technical manpower needs of the country and efforts should be made continuously to maintain a proper balance between the output of the educational institutions and employment opportunities.  (9) Production of Books  The quality of books should be improved by attracting the best writing talent through a liberal policy of incentives and remuneration. Immediate steps should be taken for the production of high quality textbooks for schools and universities. Frequent changes of textbooks should be avoided and their prices should be low enough for students of ordinary means to buy them.  The possibility of establishing autonomous book corporations on commercial lines should be examined and efforts should be made to have a few basic textbooks common  xv  throughout the country. Special attention should be given to books for children and to university level books in regional languages.  (10) Examinations  A major goal of examination reforms should be to improve the reliability and validity of examinations and to make evaluation a continuous process aimed at helping the student to improve his level of achievement rather than at 'certifying' the quality of his performance at a given moment of time.  (11) Secondary Education  (a) Educational opportunity at the secondary (and higher) level is a major instrument of social change and transformation. Facilities for secondary education should accordingly be extended expeditiously to the areas and classes which have been denied these in the past. (b) There is a need to increase facilities for technical and vocational education at this stage. Provision of facilities for secondary and vocational education should conform broadly to the requirements of the developing economy and real employment opportunities. Such linkage is necessary to make technical and vocational education at the secondary stage effectively terminal. Facilities for technical and vocational education should be suitably diversified to cover a large number of fields, such as agriculture, industry, trade and commerce, medicine and public health, home management, arts and crafts, secretarial training, etc.  (12) University Education  (a) The number of wholetime students to be admitted to a college or university department should be determined with reference to the laboratory, library and other facilities and to the strength of the staff.  (b) Considerable care is needed in establishing new universities. These should be started only after an adequate provision of funds has been made for the purpose and due care has been taken to ensure proper standards.  (c) Special attention should be given to the organization of postgraduate courses and to the improvement of standards of training and research at this level.  (d) Centres of advanced study should be strengthened and a small number of 'clusters of centres' aiming at the highest possible standards in research and training should be established.  (e) There is a need to give increased support to research in universities generally. The institutions for research should, as far as possible, function within the fold of universities or in intimate association with them.  xvi  (13) Part-time Education and Correspondence Courses Part-time education and correspondence courses should be developed on a large scale at the university stage. Such facilities should also be developed for secondary school students, for teachers and for agricultural, industrial and other workers. Education through part-time and correspondence courses should be given the same status as full-time education. Such facilities will smoothen transition from school to work, promote the cause of education and provide opportunities to the large number of people who have the desire to educate themselves further but cannot do so on a full-time basis.  (14) Spread of Literacy and Adult Education  (a) The liquidation of mass illiteracy is necessary not only for promoting participation in the working of democratic institutions and for accelerating programmes of production, especially in agriculture, but for quickening the tempo of national development in general. Employees in large commercial, industrial and other concerns should come from the industrial undertakings in the public sector. Teachers and students should be actively involved in organizing literacy campaigns, especially as part of the social and National Service Programme.  (b) Special emphasis should be given to the education of young practising farmers and to the training of youth for self employment.  (15) Games and Sports  Games and sports should be developed on a large scale with the object of improving the physical fitness and sportsmanship of the average student as well as of those who excel in this department. Where playing field and other facilities for developing a nation-wide programme of physical education do not exist, these should be provided on a priority basis. (16) Education of Minorities  Games and sports should be made not only to protect the rights of minorities but to promote their educational interests as suggested in the statement issued by the conference of the Chief Ministers of States and Central ministers held in August 1961.  (17) The Educational Structure  It will be advantageous to have a broadly uniform educational structure in all parts of the country. The ultimate objective should be to adopt the 10+2+3 pattern, the higher secondary stage of two years being located in schools, colleges or both according to local conditions.  5. The reconstruction of education on the lines indicated above will need additional outlay. The aim should be gradually to increase the investment in education so as to reach a level of expenditure of 6percent of the national income as early as possible.  xvii  6. The Government of India recognizes that reconstruction of education is no easy task. Not only are the resources scare but the problems are exceedingly complex. Considering the key role which education, science and research play in developing the material and human resources of the country, the Government of India will, in addition to undertaking programmes in the Central sector, assist the State Governments for the development of programmes of national importance where coordinated action on the part of the States and the Centre is called for.  7. The Government of India will also review, every five years, the progress made and recommend guidelines for future development.  xviii  CONTENTS  CHAIRMAN'S LETTER TO THE UNION MINISTER FOR EDUCATION iii  MEMBERS OF THE EDUCATION COMMISSION v  FOREWORD vii  NATIONAL POLICY ON EDUCATION xii  PART ONE: GENERAL PROBLEMS  CHAPTER 1: EDUCATION AND NATIONAL OBJECTIVES 2-37  Some Problems of National Development 3 Education : the Main Instrument of Change 5 The Educational Revolution 7 Relating Education to the Life, Needs and Aspirations of the People 8 Education and Productivity 9 Education and Social and National Integration 13 Education and Modernization 25 Social, Moral and Spiritual Values 27 A Challenge and a Faith 30 Summary 33  CHAPTER II: THE EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM: STRUCTURE AND STANDARDS 38-73  General Approach 38 Structure and Duration 39 Reorganization of School Education 46 Reorganization at the University Stage 54 Utilization of Facilities 57 Dynamic and Evolving Standards 61 General 66 Summary 70  CHAPTER III: TEACHER STATUS 74-112  Remuneration 74 Retirement Benefits 95  xix  Conditions of Work and Service 97 Summary 105  CHAPTER IV: TEACHER EDUCATION 113-148  General 113 Removing the Isolation of Teacher Education 114 Improving the Quality of Teacher Education 119 Improving the Quality of Training Institutions 127 Continuing Professional Education of Teachers 138 Maintenance of Standards in Teacher Education 142 Summary 144  CHAPTER V: ENROLMENT AND MANPOWER 149-180  A National Enrolment Policy 149 Enrolment Policies at Different Stages of Education 150 A Forecast of Manpower Needs 153 Educational Implications of the Estimates 160 Relating Manpower Estimates to Enrolments 169 General 174 Summary 176  CHAPTER VI: TOWARDS EQUALIZATION OF EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITY 181-239  Tuition Fees and Other Private Costs 182 Scholarships 190 Handicapped Children 204 Regional Imbalances 208 Education of Girls 221 Education of Scheduled Tribes 225 Summary 232  A P P E N D I C E S  I. An Explanatory Note on Enrolment Statistics included in the Report 240  II. Resolution of the Government of India setting up the Education Commission 258  III. Consultants to the Education Commission. 262  IV. Task Forces and Working Groups 264  xx  TABLES  2.1 Pattern of School and College Classes in Different States (1965-66) 41 3.1 Average Annual Salaries of Teachers in India (1950-51 to 1965-66) 75 3.2 Pay Scales for Teachers in Government and Non Government Schools in Some States 79 3.3 Recommended Pay Scales for School Teachers 81 3.4 Emoluments of School Teachers in 29 Districts (1965) 89 3.5 Women Teachers (1950-65) 100 4.1 General Education of Primary Teachers (1950-51 to 1965-66) 131 4.2 Number and Percentage of Trained Teachers in the States (1965-66) 134 4.3 Untrained Teachers, by Age-Groups (1965) 137 5.1 Matriculates, Intermediates, Graduates and Total Workers, by industry: India (1961) 155 5.2 Estimated Requirement of Matriculates and above, by Industry Group: India (1960-61 to 1985-86) 157 5.3 Estimates of Required Workers, Stock and Out-turn of Matriculates and above: India (1960-61 to 1985-86) 158 5.4 Enrolments Proposed (1960-61 to 1985-86) 159 5.5 Enrolments in Education (1960-85) 165 5.6(A) Estimated Total Future Employment in India (1961-86) 167 5.6(B) Matriculates and above as Percentage of Total Estimated Employment (1960-61 to 1985-86) 168 5.7 Educational Level of Working Population in Japan and USA 169 6.1 Total Revenue from Fees (1950-51 to 1965-66) 183 6.2 Fees in Education (1960-61) 184 6.3 Private Costs of Education (Annual)(1965-66) 189 6.4 Socio-economic Conditions of Students admitted to Vocational, Technical and Professional Institutions in 1965 . 199 6.5 Expenditure on Scholarships/Stipends, by Sources (1960-61) 203 6.6 Estimated Number of Handicapped Children . 205 6.7 Educational Ability, Effort and Achievement in States (1960-61) 209 6.8 Districts with Lowest and Highest Total Enrolment at Lower primary Stage 212 6.9 Districts with Lowest and Highest Enrolment of Girls at Lower Primary Stage 212  xxi  6.10 Districts with Lowest and Highest Total Enrolment at Higher Primary Stage 213 6.11 Districts with Lowest and Highest Enrolment of Girls at Higher Primary Stage 213 6.12 Districts with Lowest and Highest Total Enrolment at Secondary Stage 214 6.13 Districts with Lowest and Highest Enrolment of Girls at Secondary Stage 219 6.14 Districts with Lowest and Highest Educational Expenditure 219 6.15 Education of Girls (1950-65) 222 6.16 Education among the Scheduled Tribes (1961) 227  CHARTS  1. Pattern of Education (1965-66) : States 43 2. Pattern of Education (1965-66) : Union Territories 44 3. Equivalence of School Classes I-X (1965-66) 48 4. Equivalence of Higher Secondary and First Degree Courses in General Education (1965-66) 56 5. School Teachers, by Qualifications (1950-51 and 1965-66) 133 6. Percentage of Trained Teachers (1960-61) 136 7. Educational Level of Working Population (India) 1961 & 1986. 171 8. Expenditure on Education per capita 1960-61 (State-wise) 210 9. Distribution of Districts according to per capita Expenditure on Education (1960-61) 211 10. Enrolment at Lower Primary Stage (Classes I-V) per Thousand Population (1960-61) 215 11. Distribution of Districts according to Enrolment in Lower Primary Schools (1960-61) 216 12. Enrolment at Higher Primary Stage (Classes VI-VIII) per Thousand Population (1960-61) 217 13. Distribution of Districts according to Enrolment in Higher Primary Schools (1960-61) 218 14. Distribution of Districts according to Enrolment in Secondary Schools (1960-61) 220  xxii  PART ONE  GENERAL PROBLEMS  The programmes of educational reconstruction proposed in the Report of the Education Commission fall into three broad categories:   internal transformation of the educational system so as to relate it to the life, needs and aspirations of the nation;   qualitative improvement of education so that the standards achieved are adequate, keep continually rising and, at least in a few sectors, become internationally comparable; and   expansion of educational facilities broadly on the basis of manpower needs and with an accent on equalization of educational opportunities.  The general aspects of these programmes have been dealt with in this part of the Report.  Chapter I deals with a few major programmes which will relate education to the life, needs and aspirations of the people.  Chapters II, III and IV deal with some general aspects of qualitative improvement. Chapter II deals with the reorganization of educational structure and sonic broad programmes for the improvement of standards. Chapter III deals with programmes for raising the status of teachers, such as improvement in remuneration, retirement benefits, conditions of work and service, and prospects of profession al advancement. Chapter IV deals with programmes of teacher education-both pre-service and in-service.  Chapters V and VI deal with problems of expansion and equalization of educational opportunities. Chapter V deals with the broad principles on which a national enrolment policy should be based during the next 20 years and the manner in which the output of the educational system call be related to manpower needs or employment opportunities. Chapter VI deals with programmes of equalization such as free education, supply of books and writing materials, scholarships, education of handicapped children, reduction in regional imbalances in educational development, education of women, and education of the backward classes, especially of tribal people.  CHAPTER I  EDUCATION AND NATIONAL OBJECTIVES  1.01 The destiny of India is now being shaped in her classrooms. This, We believe, is no mere rhetoric. In a world based on science and technology it is education that determines the level of prosperity, welfare and security of the people. On the quality and number of persons coming out of our schools and colleges will depend our success in the great enterprise of national reconstruction the principal objective of which is to raise the standard of living of our people. in this context, it has become urgent   to re-evaluate the role of education in the total programme of national development;   to identify the changes needed in the existing system of education if it is to play its proper role, and to prepare a programme of educational development based on them; and   to implement this programme with determination and vigour.  1.02 The task is neither unique nor quite new. But its magnitude, gravity and urgency have increased immensely and it has acquired a new meaning and importance since the attainment of independence and the adoption of the policy and techniques of planned development of the national economy. If the pace of national development is to be accelerated, there is need for a well'-defined, bold and imaginative educational policy and for determined and vigorous action to vitalize, improve and expand education.  1.03 The population of India is now about 500 million, and half of it is below the age of 18 years-India today is essentially a land of youth. Over the next 20 years, the population is likely to increase by 230 million. The total number of educational institutions in the country is over 500,000. The number of teachers exceeds two million. The total student population, which is now about 70 million, will be more than doubled in the next twenty years; and by 1985, it will become about 170 million or about equal to the total population of Europe. The size and complexity of these problems argue the need for rapid action in evolving an appropriate educational policy; given this, the numbers involved constitute a rich promise for education's contribution to national development.  1.04 This Report is concerned with a synoptic appraisal of the existing educational situation in the country and presentation of an overall programme of educational development. But education cannot be considered in isolation or planned in a vacuum. It has to be used as a powerful instrument of social, economic and political change and will therefore, have to be related to the long-term national aspirations, the programmes of national development on which the country is engaged and the difficult short-term problems it is called upon to face.  2  SOME PROBLEMS OF NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT  1.05 Self-sufficiency in Food. The first and the most important of these is food. Mahatma Gandhi said: 'If God were to appear in India, He will have to take the form of a loaf of bread'. Even at its present level of population, the country is in short supply for food. Every five years, the addition to the population is greater than the entire population of the U.K. During the next two decades, there will be an addition of about 230 million persons (or 46 per cent of the population of 1966) even on the assumption that the existing birth rate of 40 per thousand persons is reduced to half by 1986. If it is not, this increase may be 320 million or 65 per cent of the present population. On the basis of present trends, in another 10-15 years, no country is likely to have a surplus of food to export. Even if such surpluses existed, we would have no resources to import the huge quantities of food required, or even to import the fertilizers needed. Self-sufficiency in food thus becomes not merely a desirable goal but a condition for survival.  1.06 Economic Growth and Full Employment. Allied to this is the colossal poverty of the masses and the large incidence of underemployment or unemployment among the people, particularly among the educated. India is one of the poorest countries of the world. The national income per capita, which was practically stationary for some decades, rose from Rs. 256.5 in 1950-51 to Rs. 348.6 in 1964-65-an increase of 2.2 per cent per year (at 1960-61 prices). Both the rate of growth as well as the level of national income are unsatisfactory. What is worse, even this income is very unevenly distributed. It has been suggested that our immediate objective should be to assure a minimum consumption of Rs. 35 per month to every citizen, sufficient to cover the balanced diet recommended by the Nutrition Advisory Committee and leave a modest allowance for other essential items (at 1960-61 prices). This, by itself, is no high standard. But at present, only the top 20 per cent of the population can afford it. The lowest 30 per cent have a monthly income of less than Rs. 15 and the lowest ten per cent, of less than Rs. 10. If this minimum standard of Rs. 35 per month is to be reached by 1986, great effort will have to be made on three fronts. The first is to secure a rapid rate of economic growth, at not less than six per cent per year and if possible at about seven percent per year. The second is to distribute income more equitably so that the more deprived sections of the population could have a comparatively larger share in the total national income. The third is to control the growth of population so that the birth-rate is reduced at least by one-third and preferably by half. The least to be at tempted would be to double the national income per capita (at constant prices) in the next twenty years. Similarly, steps will have to be taken to provide full employment to the people, especially to the educated.  1.07 Social and National Integration. Even more important is the role of education in achieving social and national integration. Indian society is hierarchical, stratified and deficient in vertical mobility. The social distance between the different classes, particularly between the rich and the poor, the educated and the uneducated, is large and is tending to widen. Our people profess a number of different religions; and the picture becomes even more complicated because of caste, an undemocratic institution which is still powerful and which, strangely enough, seems to have extended its sphere of  3  influence under the very democratic processes of the Constitution itself. The situation, complex as it was, has been made critical by recent developments which threaten both national unity and social progress. As education is not rooted in the traditions of the people, the educated persons tend to be alienated from their own culture. The growth of local, regional, linguistic and state loyalties tends to make the people forget 'India'. The old values, which held society together, are disappearing, and as there is no effective programme to replace them by a new sense of social responsibility, innumerable signs of social disorganization are. evident everywhere and are continually on the increase. These include strikes, increasing lawlessness and a disregard for public property, corruption in public life, and communal tensions and troubles. Student unrest, of which so much is written, is only one, and probably a minor one, of these symptoms. Against this background, the task to be attempted-the creation of an integrated and egalitarian society is indeed extremely difficult and challenging.  1.08 Political Development. The political challenge has many aspects, but three stand out. The first is the need to strengthen democracy. In spite of all odds, Indian democracy has given a fairly good account of itself so far. But it will not be permanently viable unless its foundations are deepened by the creation of an educated electorate, and a dedicated and competent leadership, and the cultivation of essential values like self control, tolerance, mutual goodwill and consideration for others, all of which make democracy not only a form of government, but a way of life. The second is related to the defence of the country's freedom. The overriding priority of this challenge is recognized, for one must live before one can grow. But it cannot be met only by maintaining a large and efficient army or training all able-bodied youth for military service. The defence of freedom is a national concern, to which every citizen contributes his best in order to achieve self-sufficiency in food and other essentials, to strength en the country's economy, and to create a secular, united and strong democratic State. The third is the growing awakening among the masses who, suppressed for centuries, have now awakened to a sense of their rights and are demanding education, equality, higher standards of living and better civic amenities. This 'explosion of expectations' has also to be met through a planned programme of national development.  1.09 Internationally, the country is facing another equally significant and urgent challenge. The gap between the standards of living in India and those of industrialized nations is very large. The first scientific industrial revolution which developed in the West over the last 200 years almost passed us by. The agro-industrial revolution which is even more crucial for us has yet to begin in our country. The world is now at the beginning of the second scientific industrial revolution of automation and cybernetics, which is likely to be in full swing before the close of the century. It is difficult to visualize the changes it will make in man's life. One thing, however, is certain: unless proper steps are taken right from now, the gap between us and the industrialized countries following this second revolution may become too wide to be bridged.  1.10 There is still another aspect to the challenge. It is true that knowledge is international and that there can be no barriers, except those of our own creation, to its free import. But India cannot for ever remain at the receiving end of the pipeline. She must  4  make her own contribution as an intellectual and cultural equal to the eternal human endeavour to extend the frontiers of knowledge. This demands a large-scale programme for the discovery and development of talent and the creation of centres of excellence in higher education which can compare favourably with the best of their kind in the world.  1.11 The difficulty of these problems is equalled only by the complexity of the situation, the gravity and urgency of the challenge, and the magnitude of the stakes involved. The Indian situation with its federal constitution (wherein several constituent States are larger than many European nations), its multi-party system of democratic government, its multi religious and mixed society consisting of highly sophisticated groups who live side by side with primitive ones, its mixed economy which includes modern factories as well as traditional agriculture, and its multiplicity of languages, presents such a complex picture that it almost resembles a miniature world. In India's attempts at national development, the welfare of one-seventh of the world's population is at stake and the future of democracy and free societies is in the balance. She is heir to an ancient and great civilization which can make a contribution to human progress by striving to create what Acharya Vinobaji has described as the 'age of science and spirituality'. She has to raise herself from her present standards of living which are amongst the lowest in the world and to take her rightful place in the comity of nations as soon as possible-a task to be accomplished within a generation at the most. Obviously, the solution of these problems makes large demands on us, the Indian people of this generation-we need a clear focus, deeper understanding, collective discipline, hard and sustained work, and dedicated leadership. The solution of these problems also needs the cooperation and assistance of the richer industrialized nations which share India's faith in democratic socialism and sympathize with her struggle to create a new social order.  EDUCATION: THE MAIN INSTRUMENT OF CHANGE  1.12 Development of Human Resources. These difficult, complex, significant and urgent problems are all interdependent, and the shortest and most effective way to their solution is obviously to make a simultaneous attack on all fronts. This will have to be attempted through two main programmes:  (1) The development of physical resources through the modernization of agriculture and rapid industrialization. This requires the adoption of a science-based technology, heavy capital formation and investment, and the provision of the essential infrastructure of transport, credit, marketing and other institutions; and  (2) The development of human resources through a properly organized programme of education.  It is the latter programme, namely, the development of human resources through education, which is the more crucial of the two. While the development of physical resources is a means to an end, that of human resources is an end in itself; and without it, even the adequate development of physical resources is not possible.  5  1.13 The reason for this is clear. The realization of the country's aspirations involves changes in the knowledge, skills, interests and values of the people as a whole. This is basic to every programme of social and economic betterment of which India stands in need.  For instance, there can be no hope of making the country self sufficient in food unless the farmer himself is moved out of his age long conservatism through a science-based education, becomes interested in experimentation, and is ready to adopt techniques that increase yields. The same is true of industry. The skilled manpower needed for the relevant research and its systematic application to agriculture, industry and other sectors of life can only come from a development of scientific and technological education. Similarly, economic growth is not merely a matter of physical resources or of training skilled workers; it needs the education of the whole population in new ways of life, thought and work. Robert Heilbroner describes the journey to economic development undertaken by a traditional society as 'the great ascent' and points out that the essential condition for its success is human 'change on a grand scale'. He observes: 'The mere lay in of a core of capital equipment, indispensable as that is for further economic expansion, does not yet catalyse a tradition-bound society into a modern one. For that catalysis to take place, nothing short of a pervasive social transformation will suffice; a wholesale metamorphosis of habits, a wrenching reorientation of values concerning time, status, money, work; and an unweaving and reweaving of the fabric of daily existence itself.'1 These observations are applicable to advances on the social, political and cultural fronts as well.  1.14 Education as Instrument of Change. If this 'change, on a grand scale' is to be achieved without violent revolution (and even for that it would be necessary) there is one instrument, and one instrument only, that can be used: EDUCATION. Other agencies may help, and can indeed sometimes have a more apparent impact. But the national system of education is the only instrument that can reach all the people. It is not, however, a magic wand to wave wishes into existence. it is a difficult instrument, whose effective use requires strength of Will, dedicated work and sacrifice. But it is a sure and tried instrument, which has served other countries well in their struggle for development. It can, given the will and the skill, do so for India.  1.15 This emphasis on the social purposes of education, on the need to use it as a tool for the realization of national aspirations or for meeting national challenges, does not imply any underestimation of values for the individual. In a democracy, the individual is an end in himself and the primary purpose of education is to provide him with the widest opportunity to develop his potentialities to the full. But the path to this goal lies through social reorganization and emphasis on social perspectives. In fact, one of the important principles to be emphasized in the socialistic pattern of society, which the nation desires to create, is that individual fulfillment will come, not through selfish and narrow loyalties to personal or group interests, but through the dedication of all to the wider loyalties of national development in all its parameters.  11Robert Heilbroner, The Great Ascent, Harper and Row, Inc., New York, 1963, p. 66.  6  THE EDUCATIONAL REVOLUTION  1.16 This direct link between education, national development and prosperity which we have emphasized and in which we deeply believe, exists only when the national system of education is properly organized, both qualitatively and quantitatively. The naive belief that all education is necessarily good, both for the individual and for society, and that it will necessarily lead to progress, can be as harmful as it is misplaced. Quantitatively, education can be organized to promote social justice or to retard it. History shows numerous instances where small social groups and elites have used education as a prerogative of their rule and as a tool for maintaining their hegemony and perpetuating the values upon which it has rested. On the other hand, there are cases in which a social and cultural revolution has been brought about in a system where equality of educational opportunity is provided and education is deliberately used to develop more and more potential talent and to harness it to the solution of national problems. The same is even more true of the quality of education. A system of university education which produces a high proportion of competent professional manpower is of great assistance in increasing productivity and promoting economic growth. Another system of higher education with the same total output but producing a large proportion of indifferently educated graduates of arts, many of whom remain unemployed or are even unemployable, could create social tensions and retard economic growth. It is only the right type of education, provided on an adequate scale, that can lead to national development; when these conditions are not satisfied, the opposite effect may result.  1.17 judged from this point of view, it becomes evident that the present system of education, designed to meet the needs of ail imperial administration within the limitations set by a feudal and traditional society, will need radical changes if it is to meet the purposes of a modem democratic and socialistic society-changes in objectives, in content, in teaching methods, in programmes, in the size and composition of the student body, in the selection and professional preparation of teachers, and in organization. In fact, what is needed is a revolution in education which in turn will set in motion the much desired social, economic and cultural revolution. The main concern of this Report is to identify the major programmes that can bring about this educational revolution which has three main aspects:   internal transformation so as to relate it to the life, needs and aspirations of the nation;   qualitative improvement so that the standards achieved are adequate, keep continually rising and, at least in a few sectors, become internationally comparable; and   expansion of educational facilities broadly on the basis of manpower needs and with an accent on equalization of educational opportunities.  it is with the first group of the above programmes, namely, the transformation of the system to reflect the needs and aspirations of the Indian people, that this chapter is mainly concerned.  7  RELATING EDUCATION TO THE LIFE, NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS OF THE PEOPLE  1.18 As is well known, the existing system of education is largely unrelated to life and there is a wide gulf between its content and purposes and the concerns of national development. For instance,  -the educational system does not reflect the supreme importance of agriculture which is neglected at all stages and does not attract an adequate share of the top talent in the country; enrolment in the agricultural faculties of universities is extremely low; and agricultural colleges are comparatively weak and underdeveloped;   the main task before the nation is to secure rapid economic development. If this is to be successfully accomplished, education must be related to productivity. The present system is too academic to be of material help in increasing national wealth;  -the schools and colleges are largely unconcerned with the great national effort at reconstruction and teachers and students generally remain uncommitted to it. They are often even unaware of its principles and very rarely have opportunities to participate ill its programmes;  -instead of promoting social and national integration and making an active effort to promote national consciousness, several features of the educational system promote divisive tendencies; caste loyalties are encouraged in a number of private educational institutions; the rich and the poor are segregated, the former attending the better type of private schools which charge fees while the latter are forced, by circumstances, to attend free government or local authority schools of poor quality; and  at a time when the need to cultivate a sense of moral and social responsibility in the rising generation is paramount, education does not emphasize character-formation and makes little or no effort to cultivate moral and spiritual values, particularly the interests, attitudes and values needed for a democratic and socialistic society.  1.19 There is hardly any need to multiply such instances. The nature of the transformation needed in our educational system is generally recognized. What we wish to emphasize is its urgency. Traditional societies which desire to modernize themselves have to transform their educational system before trying to expand it, because the greater the expansion of the traditional system of education, the more difficult and costly it becomes to change its character. This truth has been lost sight of and, during recent years, we have greatly expanded a system which continues to have essentially the same features it had at its creation about a century ago.  1.20 In our opinion, therefore, no reform is more important or more urgent than to transform education, to endeavour to relate it to the life, needs and aspirations of the people and thereby make it a powerful instrument of social, economic and cultural transformation necessary for the realization of our national goals. This can be done if education is related to productivity;  8   strengthens social and national integration; consolidates democracy as a form of government and helps the country to adopt it as a way of life;   hastens the process of modernization; and   strives to build character by cultivating social, moral and spiritual values.  All these aspects are interrelated and in the complex process of social change, we cannot achieve even one without striving for all.  EDUCATION AND PRODUCTIVITY  1.21 India is in transition from a society in which education is a privilege of a small minority to one in which it could be made available to the masses of the people. The immense resources needed for this programme can be generated only if education is related to productivity so that an expansion of education leads to an increase in national income which, in turn, may provide the means for a larger investment in education. Education and productivity call thus constitute a 'rising spiral' whose different parts sustain and support one another.  1.22 The link between education and productivity can be forged through the development of the following programmes which should receive high priority in the plans of educational reconstruction:   making science a basic component of education and culture;   making work-experience an integral part of general education;   vocationalization of education, especially at the secondary school level, to meet the needs of industry, agriculture and trade; and   improvement of scientific and technological education and research at the university stage with special emphasis on agriculture and allied sciences.  1.23 Science as a Basic Component of Education and Culture. A basic distinction between traditional and modem societies is the development and use by the latter of science-based technology which helps modernization of agriculture and the development of industries. In a traditional society, production is based largely on empirical processes, experience, and trial and error, rather than on science; in a modern society, it is basically rooted in science. The electrical industry was probably the first to become science-based; next came the chemical industry; and now, in industrialized countries, agriculture is fast becoming a branch of applied science. This close interlocking and interdependence between science and technology is a characteristic of the contemporary world. In recent years, several countries have been able to raise their GNP very rapidly because of their investment in basic science, technology and education. We are at a crucial stage ill the process of development and transformation; and in this context the role of science (using  9  the word in its broadest sense) is of the utmost importance. Science education must become an integral part of school education; and ultimately some study of science should become a part of all courses in the humanities and social sciences at the university stage, even as the teaching of science can be enriched by the inclusion of some elements of the humanities and social sciences. The quality of science teaching has also to be raised considerably so as to achieve its proper objectives and purposes, namely, to promote an ever deepening understanding of basic principles, to develop problem-solving and analytical skills and the ability to apply them to the problems of the material environment and social living, and to promote the spirit of enquiry and experimentation. Only then can a scientific outlook become part of our way of life and culture.  1.24 It is necessary to highlight this last point which is sometimes underestimated. Science strengthens the commitment of man to free enquiry and to the quest for truth as his highest duty and obligation. It loosens the bonds of dogmatism and acts as a powerful dispeller of fear and superstition, fatalism and passive resignation. By its emphasis on reason and free enquiry, it even helps to lessen ideological tensions which often arise because of adherence to dogma and fanaticism. Although it is largely occupied with the understanding of Nature at present, its development is tending more and more to help man to understand himself and his place ID the universe. In the developments that we envisage in the future, we hope that the pursuit of mere material affluence and power would be subordinated to that of higher values and the fulfillment of the individual. This concept of the mingling of 'science and spirituality' is of special significance for Indian education.  1.25 Work-experience. As another programme to relate education to life and productivity, we recommend that work-experience should be introduced as an integral part of all education-general or vocational. We define work-experience as participation in productive work in the school, in the home, in a workshop, on a farm, in a factory or in any other productive situation. In our opinion, all good and purposeful education should consist of at least four basic elements:   'literacy' or a study of languages, the humanities and the social sciences;   'numeracy' or a study of mathematics and the natural sciences; work-experience; and   social service.  In the present educational system, most of the time is taken up with the first, although even in this limited sphere, the attainments are not appreciable. The second, as indicated above, is still quite weak and needs a great deal of emphasis. But the third and fourth have been almost totally absent till recently and need to be highlighted-the former mainly for relating education to productivity, and the latter as a means of social and national integration.  1.26 The need to include work-experience as an integral part of education is to some extent inherent in the very nature and organization of formal education. Traditionally, an  10  individual grew up in society through participation in its activities, and work-experience formed the bulk of his education. While this method had several advantages, its weakness consisted in that it was not essentially dynamic and forward-looking and tended to perpetuate traditional patterns of behaviour. Formal education, on the other hand, tended to withdraw the child temporarily from participation in community activities and to train him, in an artificial environment for his anticipated future role in society. This created a cleavage between the world of work and the world of study. This defect is particularly conspicuous in our system of education which tends to strengthen the tradition of denigrating work and alienates the students, particularly the first-generation learners, from their homes and communities. The introduction of work experience is intended to overcome, to some extent, these weaknesses and to combine the advantages of the formal and informal systems of education.  1.27 Work-experience is thus a method of integrating education with work. This is not only possible but essential in modern societies which adopt science-based technology. In all traditional societies, an antithesis between education and work is usually postulated, partly because the techniques of production are primitive and do not necessarily require formal education, special skills or high intellectual ability, and partly because the work is generally manual, low-paid, akin to drudgery and confined mostly to the uneducated 'lower' classes. As against this, education is generally the privilege of the upper classes who are interested, not in working for a living, but in the cultivation of interests which may help them in the enjoyment of life. The educated elite thus become largely parasitical in character and the real productive workers-at a low level of efficiency, generally-are the unlettered peasants and artisans. The complex techniques of production (including those in agriculture) adopted in modern societies, on the other hand, require higher forms of general or technical education and a comparatively higher level of intellectual ability. High talent is required for research in technology, and even at the lower levels of work, brains become more important than physical strength. The traditional resistance of educated persons to engage themselves in productive work tends to disappear because, with the adoption of the new technology, work in industry or on the farm becomes more productive and remunerative and ceases to be looked down upon socially. The educated person thus becomes an important source of production and the uneducated person, an unproductive burden on society. This process, which has already started in our country, needs to be accelerated and therefore the inclusion of work experience as an integral part of all education acquires an urgent significance.  1.28 The need to provide some such corrective to the over academic nature of formal education has been widely recognized. In the curricula of most contemporary school systems, particularly in the socialist countries of Europe, a place is found for what is variously called 'manual work' or 'work-experience'. In our country, a revolutionary experiment was launched by Mahatma Gandhi in the form of basic education. The concept of work-experience is essentially similar. It may be described as a redefinition of his educational thinking in terms of a society on the road to industrialization.  1.29 In addition to being an effective educational tool, work experience can, in our view, serve some other important purposes. It can help to make the distinction between  11  intellectual and manual work less marked as also the social stratification based on it. It could make the entry of youth into the world of work and employment easier by enabling them to adjust themselves to it. It could contribute to the increase of national productivity both by helping students to develop insights into productive processes and the use of science, and by generating in them the habit of hard and responsible work. And it might help social and national integration by strengthening the links between the individual and the community and by creating bonds of understanding between the educated persons and the masses.  1.30 In providing work-experience, every attempt should be made to link programmes realistically to technology, to industrialization and to the application of science to productive processes, including agriculture. This 'forward look' in work-experience is important for a country which has embarked on a programme of industrialization. These problems will be discussed in detail elsewhere.2  1.31 In a well-organized programme, work-experience, at least from the higher primary stage, should also result in some earning for the student-either in cash or in kind. This would meet, to some extent, the expenditure which the students have to incur on their education or on their maintenance while at study. The amount of this earning will naturally increase as the students go up the educational ladder and it becomes possible to organize work-experience in a manner that would enable them to 'earn and learn'. The ultimate objective should be to move towards a situation in which the education. of a student is not held to be complete unless he participates in some type of work-experience in real-life conditions and earns some amount, however small, towards his own maintenance. This will also help to develop in him values which promote economic growth, such as appreciating the importance of productive work and manual labour, willingness and capacity for hard work, and thrift. We realize that this is no easy task. But it will pay adequate dividends in the long run.  1.32 Vocationalization. Another programme which can bring education into closer relationship with productivity is to give a strong vocational bias to secondary education and to increase the emphasis on agricultural and technological education at the university stage. This is of special significance in the Indian situation. where, as we have pointed out, the educational system has been training young persons so far mostly for government services and the so-called white collar professions. The introduction of practical subjects in secondary schools so as to divert them into different walks of life was first recommended, as far back as in 1882, by the Indian Education Commission. But little or no effective action was taken to implement the recommendations and even today the enrolment in the vocational courses at the secondary stage is only nine per cent of the total enrolment, which is among the lowest in the world. Even at the university stage, vocational education (other than for law, medicine, or teaching) was mostly ignored throughout the last century. Even as late as in 1917, the Calcutta University Commission pointed out that the great majority of university students about 22,000 out of 26,000  2 Vol.II, Chapter VIII  12  pursue purely literary courses which do not fit them for any but administrative, clerical, teaching and (indirectly) legal careers.3 About fifty years later, we find that the overall picture has improved only slightly and the proportion of students at the university stage enrolled in all courses of professional education is only 23 per cent of the total enrolment. Our proposals on this subject are discussed elsewhere.4 But it may be briefly stated here that we visualize the future trend of school education to be towards a fruitful mingling of general and vocational education-general education containing some elements of pre vocational and technical education, and vocational education, in its turn, having an element of general education. In the kind of society in which we will be living in the coming years, a complete separation between the two will not only be undesirable but impossible. We also expect a considerable expansion of professional education at the university stage, especially in the agricultural and technological fields.  1.33 Improvement of Scientific and Technological Education and Research at University Stage with Special Emphasis on Agriculture and Allied Sciences. For the planned development of the national economy we need a large-scale expansion of enrolment in engineering and agriculture, and at the postgraduate level, in pure science subjects. The increase has to be several times the present enrolments. The quality of education and research needs a radical improvement. We propose to discuss these matters at some length in the subsequent chapters.5  EDUCATION AND SOCIAL AND NATIONAL INTEGRATION  1.34 Social and national integration is crucial to the creation of a strong, united country, which is an essential pre-condition for all progress. It has a varied content-economic, social, cultural and political-and its different facets are closely interconnected. It needs:   confidence in the nation's future;   a continuous rise in the standard of living for the masses and the reduction in unemployment and in the disparities in development between different parts of the country, all of which are essential to promote a sense of equality of opportunity in political, economic and social terms;   a deep sense of the values and obligations of citizenship and a growing identification of the people, not with sectional loyalties but with the 'nation' as a whole;   assurance of good and impartial administration, equal treatment for every citizen, in fact and not merely in law, based on the integrity of the public services; and   mutual understanding of and respect for the culture, traditions and ways of life of different sections of the nation.  3Report of the Calcutta University Commission, Vol. 1, p. 21. 4Chapters VII, XII, XIV and XV. 5Chapters XIV, XV and XVI.  13  To make this social and psychological revolution possible, it is necessary to deal with the short-term problems facing the country in this field, particularly in regard to the growing and dangerous symptoms of social disorganization. These express themselves as the widening gulf between the rich and the poor, the privileged and the unprivileged, the urban and the rural, the educated and the uneducated. They are reflected in the general weakening of the feeling of national solidarity under the increasing impact of local, regional, linguistic, religious and other sectional or parochial loyalties. Effective steps must be taken to bridge these dangerous gulfs and strengthen national consciousness and unity.  1.35 Social and national integration is a major problem which will have to be tackled on several fronts, including education. In our view, education can and should play a very significant role in it by   introducing a common school system of public education;   making social and national service an integral part of education at all stages;   developing all modem Indian languages, and taking necessary steps to enrich Hindi as quickly as possible so that it is able to function effectively as the official language of the Union; and   promoting national consciousness.  We propose to discuss these briefly in the paragraphs that follow.  1.36 The Common School. In a situation of the type we have ill India, it is the responsibility of the educational system to bring the different social classes and groups together and thus promote the emergence of an egalitarian and integrated society. But at present instead of doing so, education itself is tending to increase social segregation and to perpetuate and widen class distinctions. At the primary stage, the free schools to which the masses send their children are maintained by the government and local authorities and are generally of poor quality. Some of the private schools are definitely better; but since many of them charge high fees, they are availed of only by the middle and the higher classes. At the secondary stage, a large proportion of the good schools are private but many of them also charge high fees which are normally beyond the means of any but the top ten per cent of the people, though some of the middle class parents make great sacrifices to send their children to them. There is thus segregation in education itself-the minority of private, fee-charging, better schools meeting the needs of the upper classes and the vast bulk of free, publicly maintained, but poor schools being utilized by the rest. What is worse, this segregation is 'increasing and tending to widen the gulf between the classes and the masses.  1.37 This is one of the major weaknesses of the existing educational system. Good education, instead of being available to all children, or at least to all the able children from every stratum of society, is available only to a small minority which is usually  14  selected not on the basis of talent but on the basis of its capacity to pay fees. The identification and development of the total national pool of ability is greatly hampered. The position is thus undemocratic and inconsistent with the ideal of an egalitarian society. The children of the masses are compelled to receive sub standard education and, as the programme of scholarships is not very large sometimes even the ablest among them are unable to find access to such good schools as exist, while the economically privileged parents are able to 'buy' good education for their children. This is bad not only for the children of the poor but also for the children from the rich and privileged groups. It gives them a short-term advantage in so far as it enables them to perpetuate and consolidate their position. But it must be realized that, in the long run, their self-interest lies in identifying themselves with the masses. By segregating their children, such privileged parents prevent them from sharing the life and experiences of the children of the poor and coming into contact with the realities of life. In addition to weakening social cohesion, they also render the education of their own children anemic and incomplete.  1.38 If these evils are to be eliminated and the educational system is to become a powerful instrument of national development in general, and social and national integration in particular, we must move towards the goal of a common school system of public education   which will be open to all children, irrespective of caste, creed, community, religion, economic conditions or social status;  -where access to good education will depend not oil wealth or class but on talent;  -Which will maintain adequate standards in all schools and provide at least a reasonable proportion of quality institutions;   in which no tuition fee will be charged; and  -which would meet the needs of the average parent so that he would not ordinarily feel the need to send his children to expensive schools outside the system.  Such an educational system has, for instance, been built up in the USSR and is one of the major factors which have contributed to its progress. It has also been developed, in different forms and to varying degrees, in other nations like the USA, France and the Scandinavian countries. The traditional English system has been different and has allowed good education, under private management, to be largely reserved for those who have the capacity to pay the necessary fees. But recently, the so-called Public Schools have come in for strong criticism in England itself and it is not unlikely that a radical change may be initiated to make them more democratic. A somewhat similar system was transplanted in India by British administrators and we have clung to it so long because it happened to be in tune with the traditional hierarchical structure of our society. Whatever its past history may be, such a system has no valid place in the new democratic and  15  socialistic society we desire to create. We examine more fully elsewhere6 how this programme can be implemented.  1.39 Social and National Service. The present educational system, as we have mentioned earlier, is also responsible for increasing the gulf between the educated and the uneducated classes, between the intelligentsia and the masses. The intelligentsia should try to become a real service-group striving to uplift the masses and should resist the temptation to become a parasitical group living for itself and perpetuating its own privileged position. Our traditional 'elite' as a whole-with some noble exceptions-had no close ties with the masses, and the new 'elite' created by modern education also remained largely aloof from the people, except during the struggle for freedom under Mahatma Gandhi when he was able to inspire large numbers of educated and even well-to-do persons to identify themselves with the interests of the masses and the country as a whole. But from the time the struggle for freedom came to an end with the attainment of independence, they have again tended to move away from the people. This is a great danger and, with a view to meeting it, suitable programmes to help in the evolution of a well-knit and united nation have to be devised.  1.40 For this purpose, we recommend that some form of social and national service should be made obligatory for all students and should form an integral part of education at all stages. This can become an instrument to build character, improve discipline, inculcate a faith in the dignity of manual labour and develop a sense of social responsibility  1.41 Programmes of social and national service can be organized in one of two ways: they can either be carried out occasionally on a part-time basis during the period of education, or organized as a period of full-time service in addition to the present period of education. The second approach was recommended by the National Service Committee appointed under the chairmanship of Dr. C. D. Deshmukh. It was suggested that national service should be a full time programme of nine to twelve months for all young persons (except for those allowed deferment on valid academic or other grounds) after passing out of higher secondary schools or the pre-university course and before entering employment or the university. The programme was to include some military training, social service, manual labour and general education. These proposals have not been adopted so far; nor have the public reactions to them been very favourable. Instead, at the time of the national emergency (1962), the scheme of compulsory National Cadet Corps (NCC) was introduced at the university stage.  1.42 About the same time, the Ministry of Education, sponsored a study of national service in several countries including Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia, Germany, Norway, Sweden, the UK, the USA, Japan and the Philippines. The report of this study has been published under the title National Service for Youth. Apart from discussing the salient features of such service in different countries, it made a number of recommendations  6 Vol. II, Chapter X.  16  about what could be done in India to develop a practicable scheme. It did not favour the 'introduction of compulsion, which has not been tried or favoured in any of these countries, but recommended that national or social service should be introduced, at least to begin with, on a voluntary basis and extended as widely as possible and that it should provide a rich and varied programme of activities which will make an imaginative approach to youth. We believe that it would be more realistic and practicable to introduce the idea of social or national service broadly on the lines recommended in this study.  1.43 Instead of adding one year to the total span of education for the purpose, a more feasible plan may be to develop, as an integral part of education, a programme which would run concurrently with academic studies in school and college. The programme should begin from the upper primary stage and continue up to the university so that the right attitudes are developed from an early age and every young person is ultimately brought within its ambit.  1.44 There are two main forms in which such service can be organized:  -encouraging and enabling students to participate in community living on the school or college campus; and   providing opportunities of participation in programmes of community development and national service.  1.45 Community Living in Schools and Colleges. Every educational institution should try to develop a rich community life of its own and provide adequate and satisfying opportunities for students to participate in it and help in organizing it. Various opportunities for such work exist in the classroom, on the campuses of the schools and the colleges. in the hostels and on the playgrounds. For instance, instead of utilizing servants and hired labour for educational institutions and their hostels, it is possible to have much of the work done by students, not primarily to save money, but to provide valuable experience. Japan has followed this Practice in her national system, and many schools in India (including some schools for well-to-do children) are also doing so to some extent. This type of work-experience would cultivate in students the habit of work and a sense of the dignity of labour. If this is done on a nation-wide scale, it will incidentally effect some saving in expenditure which could be utilized for providing certain basic amenities for students. The training institutions for basic teachers have tried to develop such traditions of community living by eliminating the use of servants to a large extent. We recommend that this pattern of hostel life should be introduced in all schools and colleges so far as possible. The practice of making self-help and manual work a part of the daily life and training in all types of educational institutions-as was the case in many of the old Ashrams and Academies-would yield good educational results. We cannot totally recreate the conditions of the past in our educational institutions; but we can certainly profit from the useful elements in past experience.  1.46 Participation in Programmes of Community Development. In addition to these institutional programmes, it is essential to make participation in meaningful programmes  17  of community service an integral part of all education from the primary to the undergraduate stage. Such participation can help to create positive attitudes towards social service and to develop closer ties between the educated persons and the rest of the people. It can also help in building up a sense of social purpose and self-confidence and giving students a sense of participation in community life and activities.  1.47 The organization of the programmes will naturally vary from stage to stage:  (1) At the primary stage, it will take the form of bringing the school closer to the community with an accent on serving the community in suitable ways.  (2) At the secondary stage, such programmes can be more ambitiously designed, and have a greater impact on young minds. Every secondary school should develop carefully planned programmes for promoting good school-community relations and suitable forms of service to the community. We recommend that about ten days a year (or a total of 30 days at the lower secondary stage and 20 days at the higher secondary stage) may be fully devoted to such programmes. Where this is not possible, it should be obligatory for the students to participate in the Labour Service Camps for secondary school students to be organized by the State Education Departments on a district basis. The programme is discussed more fully elsewhere.7  (3) Similarly, it should be obligatory for every college student, before he is awarded his first degree, to put in at least 60 days of national service in one to three stretches. Each college should develop its own programme, suited to its objectives, its resources and the age and competence of its students. Participation in Labour and Social Welfare Camps or the NCC should also be regarded as alternative forms of such service.  1.48 The NCC programme, which has been made compulsory at the university stage during the last three years, has shown some good results. It has possibilities of promoting national development by building up closer ties between the people and the defence services. It also helps to lessen the difference between the so-called 'martial' and other classes and inculcates the idea of the defence of freedom in all classes of people. As it has been started comparatively recently, we think (and the NCC authorities have also pressed this point) that it should be continued on its present basis for some time longer, say, till the end of the Fourth Five Year Plan. We would, however, recommend that the authorities concerned explore the possibility of organizing this training, not throughout the period of three years as at present, but in a concentrated and whole-time programme spread over about 60 days which, as stated earlier, could be completed by students in one to three stretches according to their convenience. As alternative forms of social service come into being, NCC should be made voluntary, leaving the students free to opt for it or any other form of social service provided.  7 Chapter VIII.  18  1.49 Evolution of a Language Policy. The development of a proper language policy can also assist materially in social and national integration. Of the many problems which the country has faced since independence, the language question has been one of the most complex and intractable, and it still continues to be so. Its early and satisfactory solution is imperative for a variety of reasons educational, cultural and political.  1.50 Development of Modern Indian Languages. It is hardly necessary to emphasize that the development of the Indian languages is both urgent and essential for the development of the Indian people and as a way of bringing together the elite and the masses. It can make scientific and technical knowledge more easily accessible to the people in their own languages and thus help not only in the progress of industrialization but also in the wider dissemination of science and the scientific outlook. Energetic action is needed to produce books and literature, particularly scientific and technical, in the regional languages. This should be regarded as a specific and imperative responsibility of the universities; and the UGC should provide general guidance and allot adequate funds for the programme.  1.51 Medium of Education in Schools and Colleges. The development of the modem Indian languages is inextricably linked with the importance given to them in the educational system, specially at the university stage. The medium selected should enable students to acquire knowledge with facility, to express themselves with clarity and to think with precision and vigour. From this point of view, the claims of the mother-tongue are preeminent. About thirty years ago, delivering the convocation address of the Calcutta University, Rabindra Nath Tagore had expressed Ms views in this matter in no uncertain terms:  In no country in the world, except India, is to be seen this divorce of the language of education from the language of the pupil. Full hundred years have not elapsed since Japan took its initiation into Western culture. At the outset she had to take recourse to textbooks written in foreign languages, but from the very first, her objective had been to arrive at the stage of ranging freely over the subjects of study in the language of the country. It was because Japan had recognized the need of such studies, not as an ornament for a select section of her citizens, but for giving power and culture to all of them, that she deemed it to be of prime importance to make them universally available to her people. And in this effort of Japan to gain proficiency in the Western arts and sciences, which was to give her the means of self-defence against the predatory cupidity of foreign powers, to qualify her to take an honoured place in the comity of nations, no trouble or expense was spared. Least of all was there the miserly folly of keeping such learning out of easy reach, within the confines of a foreign language.  Learning through a foreign medium compels the students to concentrate on cramming instead of mastering the subject-matter. Moreover, as a matter of sound educational policy, the medium of education in school and higher education should generally be the same. Prior to 1937, the position was at least consistent. English was the medium both in the upper stages of school and college education. As we have rightly adopted the regional  19  languages as the media of education at the school stage, it follows that we should adopt them increasingly at the higher stage also.  1.52 This proposal has also been supported strongly as a measure to promote social and national integration. The Emotional Integration Committee was of the view that the use of regional languages as media of education from the lowest to the highest stage of education was a matter of 'profound importance for national integration'. This was supported by the National Integration Council (June 1962) which said:  The change in the medium of instruction is justified not so much by cultural or political sentiments as on the very important academic consideration of facilitating grasp and understanding of the subject-matter. Further, India's university men will be unable to make their maximum possible contribution to the advancement of learning generally, and science and technology in particular, unless there is a continuous means of communication in the shape of the region al languages between its masses, its artisans and technicians and its university men. The development of the talent latent in the country will also, in the view of the Council, be retarded unless regional languages are employed as media of instruction at the university stage. We generally agree with these observations.  1.53 It has been sometimes argued that there should be a single medium of education at the university stage-English for the time being, to be ultimately replaced by Hindi-on the ground that it would promote mobility of teachers and students from one part of the country to another, provide for easy communication between academic and professional men and administrators, further intellectual cooperation amongst the universities and help in other ways in developing a corporate intellectual life in the country. We are inclined to think, on a balance of considerations, that this solution is not feasible. In practice, it will probably mean the indefinite continuance of English as the only medium of higher education, a development that we cannot support in the larger interests of the country. The adoption of Hindi as a common medium of education in all parts of India is not possible for some years to come, and in non-Hindi areas it will still have some of the disadvantages associated with the use of a foreign medium and is likely to be resisted. It would, therefore, be unwise to strive to reverse the present trend for the adoption of the regional languages as media of education at the university stage and to insist on the use of a common medium in higher education throughout the country.  1.54 To sum up:  (1) We are convinced of the advantages of education through the regional languages. We regard the development of regional languages as vital to the general progress of the country, and as an important step towards the improvement of quality in education. To avoid any misunderstanding we would emphasize that this does not mean the shutting out of English, or other world languages. In fact we will profit from these languages all the more when our education becomes more effective and useful.  20  (2) in view of the importance of the problem, we suggest that the UGC and the universities carefully work out a feasible programme suitable for each university or group of universities. The change-over should take place as early as possible, and, in any case, within about ten years, since the problem will only become more complex and difficult with the passage of time. A large programme of producing the needed literature in the Indian languages will have to be undertaken, and adequate arrangements will have to be made for the training and re-training of teachers.  (3) What is required is to formulate a clear policy, to express it in unambiguous terms, and to follow it up with firm, bold and imaginative action. We should avoid a policy of drift which will only be harmful. Nor should we get involved in the vicious circle of no production because no demand' and 'no demand because no production'.  (4) We recognize that suitable safeguards would have to be devised, in the transitional stage, to prevent any lowering of standards during the process of change-over because of inadequate preparation. In fact the desirability and success of the change should be judged in terms of the contribution it makes to raising the quality of education. But caution should not be equated with delay or procrastination. It is meaningful only if it is part of a policy of determined, deliberate and vigorous action.  1.55 There will, however, be one important exception to this general rule, namely, all India institutions which admit, in considerable numbers, students from different parts of the country. These now use English as the medium of education, which should continue undisturbed for the time being. A change-over to Hindi may be considered in due course provided two conditions are fulfilled. The first is the effective development of Hindi as a medium of education at this level. This is a matter which can be left to the UGC and the institutions concerned to decide. The second is the equally important political consideration that, in such a change-over, the chances of students from non-Hindi areas should not be adversely affected and that the proposal should have the support of the non Hindi States. The latter Principle has been already conceded by the Government of India even in the larger sphere of the use of Hindi in official communications between the States and the Centre.  1.56 Simultaneously, it is necessary to make the regional languages the official languages of the regions concerned as early as possible so that higher services are not de facto barred to those who study in the regional medium. The acceptance of the regional languages as media at the university is much more likely when good employment, which now depends largely on a knowledge of English and is more easily open to students who have studied through English, becomes available to those who have studied through the regional medium. We might also add here that, though Urdu is not a regional language in the ordinary sense of the word, it has an all-India significance since it is spoken by certain sections of the people in different parts of the country. Due encouragement must be given to it at all stages not only because of this peculiar character but also because of its close links with the official language, Hindi.  21  1.57 Channels of International Communication. The introduction of the regional languages as media of education should not be interpreted to mean underrating the importance of English in the university. For a successful completion of the first degree course, a student should possess an adequate command over English, be able to express himself in it with reasonable case and felicity, understand lectures in it and avail himself of its literature. Therefore, adequate emphasis will have to be laid on its study as a language right from the school stage. English should be the most useful 'library language' in higher education and our most significant window on the world. It is also important to encourage the study of other foreign languages on a more extensive scale for a variety of academic and practical purposes, Russian has a special significance for the study of science and technology in the present-day world.8 In addition, French, German, Japanese, Spanish and Chinese are important world languages for communication and for acquiring knowledge and culture. We recommend that all universities, some selected colleges, and also a small proportion of carefully selected schools should provide for the teaching of these languages. The knowledge of another foreign language (especially Russian) besides English should be a requirement for a doctorate degree, and in certain subjects, even for the Master's degree.  1.58 The country will need in increasing numbers a group of persons, small but extremely proficient in important foreign languages and their literature. From this point of view, it would be necessary to establish a few schools which will begin teaching, right from an early age, the important foreign languages referred to above and will use them also as media of education. The admission to these schools should be on a selective basis and there should be an adequate provision of scholarships.  1.59 It would be an important step towards the general development of higher education, and also towards international cooperation and understanding, if there were established a small number of institutions, at university level, with some of the important 'world languages' as media of education. A beginning has already been made with the Institute of Russian Studies at New Delhi. It would be desirable to set up, during the Fourth Plan, institutions on somewhat similar lines for German, French, Spanish and Japanese languages. We could also establish one or two more institutions for Russian. The institutions will have to be largely residential. It will be an advantage to have them as constituent units of universities in their neighbourhood.  1.60 Channels of Internal Communication. Hindi (or any other Indian language for that matter) must be greatly developed and enriched before it can attain the status of a library language, that is, a language which can serve as a vehicle for acquiring a substantial part of the current and rapidly expanding stock of world knowledge. This has to be taken into account fully in determining our language policy. This implies, as stated earlier, that every graduate will need to acquire a reasonable proficiency in a library language, which will be English for most students. It will thus serve as a link language in higher education for academic work and intellectual inter communication.  8It is interesting to note that the number of students studying Russian in the UK is larger than that of the students studying Russian in India.  22  1.61 It is, however, equally obvious that English cannot serve as the link-language for the majority of our people. It is only Hindi which can and should take this place in due course. As it is the official language of the Union and the link-language of the people, all measures should be adopted to spread it in the non-Hindi areas. The success of this programme will largely depend on the extent to which it is voluntarily accepted by the people of these areas. We were interested to know that in the Kerala University, where students can take Hindi in place of Malayalam at the undergraduate stage, a large proportion of students choose to study Hindi. We have also seen increasing evidence on the part of non-Hindi areas to take to the study of Hindi. AR their efforts in this matter, particularly in the non-official sector, should receive encouragement.  1.62 In addition to Hindi, it is essential to provide multiple channels of inter-State communication in all modem Indian languages. In every linguistic region, there should be a number of persons who know all the other modem Indian languages and some who are familiar with their literatures and able to contribute to them. For this purpose, we recommend that there should be adequate arrangements, both in schools and colleges, for teaching different modern Indian languages. In addition, steps should be taken to establish efficient departments in some of the modern Indian languages in every university. It may also be advisable to create a Small Dumber of special institutes (or advanced centres) for the comparative study of different languages and their linguistic problems. At the B.A. and M.A. levels, it should be possible to combine two modern Indian languages. This will incidentally supply the bilingual persons needed for language teaching in schools and colleges.  1.63 Promoting National Consciousness. India is a land of diversities of different castes, peoples, communities, languages, religions and cultures. What role can the schools and universities play in enabling their students to discover the 'unity in diversity' that India essentially is, and in fostering a sense of national solidarity transcending narrower loyalties ?  1.64 Unfortunately, our school system as a whole has had no strong tradition of striving to develop a sense of national unity and national consciousness. Under the British administration, the schools were expected to teach loyalty to the British rule rather than instil love for the motherland. Consequently, the effort to develop national consciousness was made largely outside the educational system, particularly during the struggle for freedom which developed between 1900 and 1947. Its foundation was a renewed belief in the value of national culture and traditions and a pride in India's past achievements. It recognized that, in the cultural exchange between India and the West, India also had something worth while to give in return for the gift of modern science and technology, and that Indians should strive to maintain the valuable elements in their own traditional culture while accepting all that is good in the West. This was not meant as an attempt at revivalism, though it was certainly so interpreted by some sections. It was an attempt, as Gandhiji put it, to refuse to be blown off one's feet even when all the windows of one's house were thrown open to fresh winds from every corner of the world.  23  1.65 With the attainment of Independence, the situation has changed greatly. The one rallying point which had kept many diverse elements together ceased to exist, and as the schools have been unable to inculcate and strengthen national consciousness, the sentiment itself seems to be wearing thin, particularly in the new generation now coming of age. We saw something similar to the old spirit reviving in recent years-in the wake of the Chinese invasion of 1962 and during the recent conflict with Pakistan. Obviously, such unfortunate international conflicts cannot be considered the normal ways to awaken and strengthen the national spirit. The only enduring solution to the problem is to place this responsibility on the educational system and to make it an effective instrument for the purpose. There is much evidence in the world to show that schools and universities can play a major and helpful part in the regeneration and advancement of a people and in generating the psychological energy needed for the purpose. If rightly, oriented, this approach is not, and should not be incompatible with the wider loyalties to mankind as a whole which we have also emphasized.  1.66 The deepening of national consciousness can be fostered specially by two programmes: (1) the understanding and reevaluation of our cultural heritage, and (2) the creation of a strong driving faith in the future towards which we aspire. The first would be promoted by well-organized teaching of the languages and literatures, philosophy, religions and history of India, and by introducing the students to Indian architecture, sculpture painting, music, dance and drama. In addition, it would be desirable to promote greater knowledge, under standing and appreciation of the different parts of India by including their study in the curricula, by the exchange of teachers wherever possible, by the development of fraternal relations between educational institutions in different parts of the country, and by the organization of holiday camps and summer schools on an inter State basis designed to break down regional or linguistic barriers. It would further be necessary to establish and maintain all-India institutions which will admit students from different parts of the country. Faith in the future would involve an attempt, as a part of the course in citizenship, to bring home to the students the principles of the Constitution, the great human values referred to in its preamble, the nature of the democratic and socialistic society which we desire to create and the five-year plans of national development. At the higher stages of education the students should learn to assess the value of modern movements and tendencies so that they may learn which of them can and should be usefully assimilated into our culture. We should, however, take care to avoid identifying all 'modern' with 'western' values.  1.67 Education for International Understanding. There is no essential contradiction, as we have pointed out earlier, between this objective and the development of international understanding for the 'one-world' towards which we are moving. On the whole, textbooks used in national school systems perhaps contain fewer untrue or hostile remarks about other countries than they did in the past, thanks partly to the work Of UNESCO, under whose auspices multi-national and bi-national efforts have been made for their revision. The sins are more often now of omission than of active commission. We should, however, guard ourselves against this also, for ignorance is often not less dangerous than hostility. Our studies in the humanities and social sciences should be so oriented that, while helping students to become good and active citizens of their own  24  country, these will also enable them to acquire a knowledge and understanding of the essential features of the outside world, particularly of our neighbouring and Afro-Asian countries. Indian culture has had a strong and honourable tradition of international understanding, of valuing, on the whole with an open mind, the contributions of different countries and races to human civilization. For this purpose, the fact that she is a country with many communities but of one common citizenship should actually prove to be an advantage. The constitution Of UNESCO speaks of 'the fruitful diversity of the cultures of mankind'. If through the schools and universities, a person learns to appreciate the basic rightness of that phrase in his own federal and multi-community country, he is less likely to forget it on the international plane where he deals with persons belonging to different nations but enjoying equal membership in the community of mankind. The programme of social and national integration which will minimize the internal barriers and suspicions which exist today will not only be a national gain, but may even make an impact on international relations and the international situation as a whole. This was one of the great inspirations of Jawaharlal Nehru's policy.  1.68 Democratic Values. In this context, Special emphasis has to be laid on the development of values such as a scientific temper of mind, tolerance, respect for the culture of other national groups, etc., which will enable us to adopt democracy, not only as a form of government, but also as a way of life. As stated earlier, the population of India consists of persons who profess different religions, speak different languages, belong to different races, castes, classes and communities. It is precisely in such a situation that democracy can make its most significant contribution. A healthy development of democratic trends will help to soften the impact of this division into social, economic and cultural groups. The task is admittedly difficult; but it can convert the differences of language, cultural pattern, religion, etc., into the warp and woof of a very rich and rewarding social and cultural life. The problem of national integration is essentially one of harmonizing such differences, of enabling different elements of the population to live peacefully and cooperatively and to utilize their varied gifts for the enrichment of the national life as a whole. We have to cultivate a spirit of large hearted tolerance, of mutual give and take, of the appreciation of ways in which people differ from one another. This is a very exacting experiment in living' that we have launched and no education will be worthwhile if the educated mind is unable to respond to this situation with intelligence and imagination.  EDUCATION AND MODERNIZATION  1.69 We have already stated that the most distinctive feature of a modern society, in contrast with a traditional one, is in its adoption of a science-based technology. It is this which has helped such societies to increase their production so spectacularly. It may be pointed out, however, that science-based technology has other important implications for social and cultural life and it involves fundamental social and cultural changes which are broadly described as 'modernization'. We shall briefly discuss the impact of this modernization on programmes of educational reconstruction.  25  1.70 Explosion of Knowledge. There has been a great explosion of knowledge during the last few decades. In a traditional society, the stock of knowledge is limited and grows slowly so that the main aim of education is interpreted to be its preservation. In a modern society, on the other hand, the stock of knowledge is far greater and the pace of its growth is infinitely quicker. One of the main tasks of education ill a modern society is to keep pace with this advance in knowledge. In such a society, knowledge inevitably ceases to be something to be received passively; it is something to be actively discovered. If this is rightly understood, it would involve a revolution in traditional education where 'to know' has come to mean 'to know by heart', where respect for all inherited knowledge is assiduously cultivated and where the assimilative faculties tend to be emphasized to the neglect of the critical and creative ones. In India, as in other countries where similar conditions prevail, this would require, among other things, a new approach to the objectives and methods of education, and changes in the training of teachers. Unless they are trained in new ways of teaching and learning, the students in schools and colleges will not be able to receive the type of education needed for the new society.  1.71 Rapid Social Change. Another feature of a modern society is the quick, almost breath-taking rate at which social change takes place. In a traditional society, change is so slow that the conservatism of the educational system does comparatively little harm. ID a modern society, on the other hand, change is so rapid that the school must always be alert if it is to keep abreast of significant changes. There is, therefore, an imperative need for adopting a dynamic policy in such a situation. An educational system which does not continually renovate itself, becomes out of date and hampers progress because it tends to create a lag between its operative purposes and standards and the new imperatives of development, both in quality and quantity. The very aim of education has to be viewed differently-it is no longer taken as concerned primarily with the imparting of knowledge or the preparation of a finished product, but with the awakening of curiosity, the development of proper interests, attitudes and values and the building up of such essential skills as independent study and the capacity to think and judge for oneself without which it is not possible to become a responsible member of a democratic society.  1.72 Need for Rapid Advance. Two other aspects of modernization need emphasis. The first is that once a society launches itself upon a programme of modernization, there is no turning back, no half-way house where we can arrest the process. In the initial stages, such a change must disturb the traditional equilibrium reached and maintained over centuries which, though it had its obvious disadvantages, had some built-in redeeming factors as well. The attempt to create a new social order naturally creates a host of unexpected social, economic, cultural and political problems. But if one tinkers with the problems involved or tries to march with faltering steps, if one's commitments and convictions are half-hearted and faith is lacking, the new situation may turn out to be worse than the old one. The only solution to these transitional problems is to move rapidly forward and create a new equilibrium, based on the full implications of the process of modernization.  1.73 Modernization and Educational Progress. The progress of modernization will, therefore, be directly related to the pace of educational advance and the one sure way to  26  modernize quickly is to spread education, produce educated and skilled citizens, and train an adequate and competent intelligentsia. The Indian society of today is heir to a great culture. Unfortunately, however, it is not an adequately educated society, and unless it becomes one, it will not be able to modernize itself and to respond appropriately to the new challenges of national reconstruction or take its rightful place in the comity of nations. The proportion of persons who have so far been able to receive secondary and higher education is very small at present-less than two per cent of the entire population. This will have to be increased to at least ten per cent to make any significant impact. The composition of the intelligentsia must also be changed; it should consist of able persons, both men and women, drawn from all strata of society. There must also be changes in the skills and fields of specialization to be cultivated. At present, the intelligentsia consists predominantly of the white-collar professions and students of the humanities, while the proportion of scientists and technical workers in its ranks is quite small. To change this, greater emphasis must be placed, as we have argued earlier, on vocational subjects, science education and research. The average level of competence is not at all satisfactory, due mainly to inadequate standards maintained in the universities. This is damaging to Indian academic life and its reputation. In order to change this situation radically, it will be necessary to establish a few 'major' universities in the country which attain standards comparable to the best in any part of the world, and which will gradually spread their influence to others. This is one of the basic reforms needed in our system of higher education.9  SOCIAL, MORAL AND SPIRITUAL VALUES  1.74 Modernization does not mean-least of all in our national situation-a refusal to recognize the importance of or to inculcate necessary moral and spiritual values and self discipline. Modernization, if it is to be a living force, must derive its strength from the strength of the spirit. Modernization aims, amongst other things, at creating an economy of plenty which will offer to every individual a larger way of life and a wider variety of choices. While this freedom to choose has its own advantages, it also means that the future of society will depend increasingly upon the type of choice each individual makes. This would naturally depend upon his motivation and sense of values, for he might make the choice either with reference entirely to his own personal satisfaction or in a spirit of service to the community and of furthering the common good. The expanding: knowledge and the growing power which modernization places at the disposal of society must, therefore, be combined with the strengthening and deepening of the sense of social responsibility and a keener appreciation of moral and spiritual values. While a combination of ignorance with goodness may be futile, that of knowledge with a lack of essential values may be dangerous. The weakening of social and moral values in the younger generation is creating many serious social and ethical conflicts in western societies and there is already a desire among some great western thinkers to balance the knowledge and skills which science and technology bring with the values and insights associated with ethics and religion at Its best, viz., a search for the knowledge of the Self,  9See Chapter XI for details. 3  27  of the meaning of life, of the relationship of man to other human beings and to the ultimate reality in the situation that is developing it is equally important for us to give a proper value orientation to our educational system.  1.75 It is not our purpose to enumerate a list of values to be inculcated. What we would like to emphasize is the need to pay attention to the inculcation of right values in the students, at all stages of education. We are happy to note that an awareness of this responsibility has been growing since independence. The University Education Commission (1948) considered both its philosophical and practical aspects and made certain valuable proposals for reform. However, except in a small Dumber of 'institutions, they were not implemented. In 1959 the Central Advisory Board of Education appointed a special committee on Religious and Moral Instruction (the Sri Prakasa Committee). The Report of this Committee has been before the country for five years, but the response from educational institutions has been neither active nor enthusiastic. This is having a very undesirable effect on the character of the rising generation. It has, therefore, become necessary and urgent to adopt active measures to give a value-orientation to education. From this point of view, we make the following recommendations:  (1) The Central and State Governments should adopt measures to introduce education in moral, social and spiritual values in all institutions under their direct control on the lines recommended by the University Education Commission on religious and moral instruction.  (2) The privately-managed institutions should also be expected to follow suit.  (3) Apart from education in such values being made an integral part of school programmes generally, some periods should be set apart in the time-table for this purpose. They should be taken, not by specially recruited teachers but by general teachers, preferably from different communities, considered suitable for the purpose. it should be one of the important objectives of training institutions to prepare teachers for it.  (4) We also suggest that the University Departments in Comparative Religion should be specially concerned with the ways in which these values can be taught wisely and effectively and should undertake preparation of special literature for use by students and teachers.  1.76 Our proposals for such instruction at the school stage are discussed elsewhere.10 For higher education, we agree with the suggestions made by the University Education Commission and the Sri Prakasa Committee. A general study of the different religions of the world should be a part of the first degree courses and a graded syllabus should be prepared for the purpose. For instance, in the first year, it can deal with the lives of great religious leaders; in the second, selections from the scriptures of the world with a  10 Vol.II, Chapter VIII.  28  universal appeal could be studied; and in the third year, the central problems of the philosophy of religions considered. We would also like to lay stress on the importance of encouraging students to meet in groups for silent meditation.  1.77 In the attempt to inculcate values through education, we should draw freely upon our own traditions as well as the traditions of other countries and cultures. There are strands within Indian thought itself which can lead to the new outlook appropriate for a modern society and which can prepare the people for a willing acceptance of life with all its joys and sorrows, its challenges and triumphs. In them, too, we can find inspiration for social service and a faith in the future. Mahatma Gandhi, for instance-and some other great leaders of thought-discovered the inspiration for their idealism and their passionate striving for social justice and social reconstruction largely from these sources. It is such re interpretations and re-evaluations of the past that are now most needed. It is, however, specially important in the world of today that this effort should not be restricted to the national sources only. It would be necessary to draw upon the liberalizing forces that have arisen in the western nations and which have emphasized, among other things, the dignity of the individual, equality and social justice, e.g., the French Revolution, the concept of the welfare state, the philosophy of Marx and the rise of socialism.  A major weakness of the Indian, and particularly of the Hindu society, in the past has been a lack of equality and social justice. These balancing influences have, therefore, a great significance. Similar assimilations of whatever is significant should also be discriminatingly made from other important nations and cultures such as the Chinese, Japanese or Islamic.  1.78 Secularism and Religion. In a multi-religious society like ours, it is necessary to define the attitude of the State to religion, religious education and the concept of secularism. The adoption of a secularist policy means that in political, economic and social matters, all citizens, irrespective of their religious faith, will enjoy equality of rights, that no religious community will be favoured or discriminated against, and that instruction in religious dogmas will not be provided in State schools. But it is not an irreligious or anti-religious policy; it does not belittle the importance of religion as such. it gives to every citizen the fullest freedom of religious belief and worship. It is anxious to ensure good relations amongst different religious groups and to promote not only religious tolerance but also an active reverence for all religions.  1.79 In such a society, however, one has to make a distinction between religious education' and 'education about religions'. The former is largely concerned with the teaching of the tenets and practices of a particular religion, generally in the form in which the religious group envisages them, whereas the latter is a study of religions and religious thought from a broad point of view-the eternal quest of the spirit. it would not be practicable for a secular State with many religions to provide education in any one religion. It is, however, necessary for a multi-religious democratic State to promote a tolerant study of all religions so that its citizens can understand each other better and live amicably together. It must be remembered that, owing to the ban placed on religious instruction in schools and the weakening of the home influences which, in the past, often  29  provided such instruction, children are now growing up without any clear idea of their own religion and with no chance of learning about others. In fact, the general ignorance and misunderstanding in these matters are so widespread in the younger generation as to 'De fraught with great danger for the development of a democracy in which tolerance is rated high as a value. We suggest that a syllabus giving well-chosen information about each of the major religions should be included as a part of the course in citizenship or as part of the general education to be introduced in schools and colleges up to the first degree. It should highlight the fundamental similarities in the great religions of the world and the emphasis they place on the cultivation of certain broadly comparable moral and spiritual values. It would be a great advantage to have a common course on this subject in all parts of the country and common textbooks which should be prepared at the national level by competent and suitable experts on each religion. When these courses have been prepared, it would be worth while to have them scrutinized by a small committee of eminent persons belonging to different religions to ensure that nothing is included in them to which any religious group could take legitimate objection.  1.80 A vitalized study of science with its emphasis on open mindedness, tolerance and objectivity would inevitably lead to the development of a more secular outlook, in the sense in which we use the word, amongst those who profess different religions. This process needs to be carefully and wisely encouraged. Simultaneously, there is a sense in which the walls between the secular and the spiritual are tending to break down and what is secular is seen to have spiritual roots. In the words of Dr. Iqbal, 'the spirit finds its opportunity in the material, the natural and the secular. All that is secular is, therefore, sacred in the roots of its being'. This is what we envisage as the direction of our future development. We believe that India should strive to bring science and the values of the spirit together and in harmony, and thereby pave the way for the eventual emergence of a society which would cater to the needs of the whole man and not only to a particular fragment of his personality. A CHALLENGE AND A FAITH  1.81 India is on the move again-with the promise of a new renaissance in the making. After a long period of foreign rule she has emerged into freedom. That her means for the winning of freedom, adopted under Gandhi and Nehru, were as noble as the ends, is a signpost of profound historical significance.  1.82 Politically the land is free, but economically she has a long, way to go. The elimination of ignorance and of grinding poverty accumulated over centuries of inertia and exploitation is not an easy task. India today has half of the total illiterate population of the world. About fifty million of her people, a tenth of the total population, live on an yearly income of no more than Rs. 120. The problems are grave and immense. But this is only one side of the picture. During recent, years, great strides have been taken towards industrialization, towards modernization of agriculture, and to provide better health and life to the people.  30  1.83 The most powerful tool in the process of modernization is education based on science and technology. The one great lesson of the present age of science is that, with determination and the willingness to put in hard work, prosperity' within the reach of any nation which has a stable and progressive government. There is no doubt that in the years to come India's trade and commerce will grow: there will be more food for all, more education, better health; and a reasonable standard of living will be available. But India's contribution can and should be far more than these material gains. She should learn to harness science but she must also learn not to be dominated by science. In this respect India has a unique advantage with her great tradition of duty without self-involvement unacquisitive temperament tolerance, and innate love of peace and reverence for all living things. Too often are these precious assets forgotten and we tend to relapse into moods of pessimism, fears and forebodings, discord and destructive criticism. A new pride and a deeper faith expressed in living for the noble ideals of peace and freedom, truth and compassion, are now needed.  1.84 In our efforts to go in a big way for science-based industrialization, we have the advantage of drawing upon a great stock of knowledge accumulated by the western world over the last two hundred years. We also have another lesson to learn. The industrialization of the West was in some ways brought about at no small cost to the human spirit. The two world wars resulting in human killing on an unprecedented scale are a grim reminder of that suffering of the spirit. If we learn the lesson right, we can harness science to support rather than weaken our basic commitment to cultural and spiritual values. It should be our goal and obligation to re interpret, and raise to a new level of understanding, the Insight gained by the ancient seers as regards the fundamental problems of life which in some ways is unique and 'represents the quintessence of deepest insight into the happenings of the world'.11  1.85 The opening stanza of the Kena Upanishad is as challenging today to the scientific and seeking mind as it was thousands of years ago:  konaoiYatM ptit p`-iYtM mana:.  kona p`aNa: p`qama: p`Oit yau@t:.  konaoiYataM vaacaaimamaaM vadint.  caxau: Eaaõ k ] dovaaoyaunai@t..  By whom missioned falls the mind-shot to its mark? By whom yoked does the first life breath move forward on its paths? By whom impelled is this word that men speak ? What god set eye and car to their workings ?'.12  11E. Schroedinger, What is Life, Cambridge University, 1944, 12Kena Upanishad, translated by Sri Aurobindo, Sri Aurobindo Ashram, Pondicherry, 1952.  31  1.86 Man's knowledge and mastery of outer space and of his own self are out of balance. It is this imbalance which mankind must seek to redress. Man now faces himself. He faces the choice of rolling down a nuclear abyss to ruin and annihilation or of raising himself to new heights of glory and fulfilment yet unimagined. India has made many glorious contributions to world culture, and perhaps the grandest of them all is the concept and ideal of non-violence and compassion, sought, expounded and lived by Buddha and Mahavira, Nanak and Kabir, and in our own times by Vivekananda, Ramana Maharishi and Gandhi, and which millions have striven to follow after them.  1.87 The greatest contribution of Europe doubtlessly is the scientific revolution. If science and ahimsa join together in a creative synthesis of belief and action, mankind will attain to a new level of purposefulness, prosperity and spiritual insight. Can India do something in adding a new dimension to the scientific achievement of the West? This poses a great challenge and also offers a unique opportunity to the men and women of India, and especially to the young people who are the makers of the future. In this context we cannot do better than to quote Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru:  Can we combine the progress of science and technology with this progress of the mind and spirit also? We cannot be untrue to science because that represents the basic fact of life today. Still less can we be untrue to those essential principles for which India has stood in the past throughout the ages. Let us then pursue our path to industrial progress with all our strength and vigour and, at the same time, remember that material riches without toleration and compassion and wisdom may well turn to dust and ashes.13  13India and the World, Azad Memorial Lectures, 1959, Indian Council for Cultural Relations, New Delhi, 1962.  32  SUMMARY  1 The most important and urgent reform needed in education is to transform it, to endeavour to relate it to the life, needs and aspirations of the people and thereby make it the powerful instrument of social, economic and cultural transformation necessary for the realization of the national goals. For this purpose, education should be developed so as to increase Productivity, achieve social and national integration, accelerate the process of modernization and cultivate social, moral and spiritual values. 1.20*  2 Education and Productivity. The following programmes are needed to relate education to productivity:  (1) Science Education. Science education should become an integral part of school education and ultimately become a part of all courses at university stage also. 1.23-24  (2) Work Experience. Work-experience should be introduced as an integral part of all education.  (3) Every attempt should be made to orient work-experience to technology and industrialization and to the application of science to productive processes, including agriculture. 1.25-33  (4) Vocationalization. Secondary education should be increasingly and largely vocationalized, and in higher education, a greater emphasis should be placed on agricultural and technical education. 1.32  3 Social and National Integration. The achievement of social and national integration is an important objective of the educational system and the following steps should be taken to strengthen national consciousness and unity:  (1) The Common School. The common school system of public education should be adopted as a national goal and effectively implemented in a phased programme spread over 20 years. 1.36-38  (2) Social and National Service. Social and national service should be made obligatory for all students at all stages. These programmes should be organized concurrently with academic studies in schools and colleges:  (i) At the primary stage, programmes of social service should be developed in all schools on the lines of those developed in basic education.  *The figures at the end of each recommendation indicate the chapter and para number.  33  (ii) At the secondary stage, social service for a total of 30 days at the lower secondary stage and 20 days at the higher secondary stage (10 days a year) should be obligatory for all students. it may be done in one or more stretches. (iii) At the undergraduate stage, social service for 60 days in total (to be done in one or more stretches) should be obligatory for all students.  (iv) Every educational institution should try to develop a programme of social and community service of its own in which all its students would be suitably involved for periods indicated above.  (v) Labour and social service camps should be organized by creating a special machinery for them in each district. Participation in such camps should be obligatory for all students for whom no programmes of social service have been organized in the educational institutions they attend.  (vi) N.C.C. should be continued on its present basis till the end of the Fourth Five Year Plan. The authorities concerned should explore the possibility of providing this training, on a whole-time basis, in a continuous programme of about 60 days at the undergraduate stage. In the meanwhile alternate forms of social service should be developed and as they conic into operation, NCC should be made voluntary. 1.39-48  (3) Language Policy. The development of an appropriate language policy can materially assist in social and national 'integration.  (4) Mother-tongue has a pre-eminent claim as the medium of education at the school and college stages. Moreover, the medium of education in school and higher education should generally be the same. The regional languages should, therefore, be adopted as the media of education in higher education.  (5) The UGC and the universities should work out a programme for the adoption of these recommendations suitably for each University or groups of universities. The change-over should be completed within ten years.  (6) Energetic action is needed to produce books and literature, particularly scientific and technical, in regional languages. This should be made a responsibility of the universities assisted by UGC.  (7) All-India institutions should continue to use English as the medium of education for the time being. The eventual adoption of Hindi should, however, be considered in due course, subject to certain safeguards.  (8) The regional languages should also be made the languages of administration for the regions concerned as early as possible so that the higher services are not barred to those who study in the regional medium.  34  (9) The teaching and study of English should continue to be pro moted. right from the school stage. Encouragement should be given also to the study of other languages of international communication. The study of Russian needs special attention.  (10) It would be desirable to set up a few institutions, both at the school and university levels, with some of the important world languages as media of education.  (11) English will serve as a link language in higher education for academic work and intellectual inter-communication. It is, however, equally obvious that English cannot serve as the link language for the majority of the people. It is only Hindi which can and should take this place in due course. As it is the official language of the Union and the link language of the people all measures should be adopted to spread it in the non-Hindi areas.  (12) In addition to Hindi, it is essential to provide multiple channels of inter-State communication in all modern Indian languages. In every linguistic region, there should be a number of persons who know the other modern Indian languages and some who are familiar with their literature and able to contribute to them. For this purpose, there should be adequate arrangements, both in schools and colleges, for teaching different modern Indian languages. In addition, steps should be taken to establish efficient departments in some of the modern Indian languages in every university. At the B.A. and M.A. levels, it should be possible to combine two modern Indian languages. 1.49-62  (13) Promotion of National Consciousness. Promoting national consciousness should be an important objective of the school system. This should be attempted through the promotion of understanding and re-evaluation of our cultural heritage and the creation of a strong driving faith in the future towards which we aspire:  (a) The first would be promoted by well-organized teaching of the languages and literatures, philosophy, religions and history of India, and by introducing the students to Indian architect-lure, sculpture, painting, music, dance and drama. in addition, it would be desirable to promote greater knowledge, understanding and appreciation of the different parts of India by including their study in the curricula, by the exchange of teachers wherever possible, by the development of fraternal relations between educational institutions in different parts of the country, and the organization of holiday camps and summer schools on all inter State basis designed to break down regional or linguistic barriers.  (b) Creation of a faith in the future would involve an attempt, as a part of the courses in citizenship, to bring home to the students the principles of the Constitution, the great human values referred to in its Preamble, the nature of the democratic socialistic society which we desire to create and the Five Year Plans of national development.  (14) There is no contradiction between the promotion of national consciousness and the development of international understanding which education should simultaneously strive to promote.  35  (15) The educational programme in schools and colleges should be designed to inculcate democratic values. 1.63-68  4 Education and Modernization. (1) In a modern society, knowledge increases at a terrific pace and social change is very rapid. This needs a radical transformation in the educational system. Education is no longer taken as concerned primarily with the imparting of know ledge or the preparation of a finished product, but with the awakening of curiosity, the development of proper interests, attitudes and values and the building up of such essential skills such as independent study and the capacity to think and judge for oneself. This also involves a radical alteration in the methods of teaching and in the training of teachers.  (2) To modernize itself, a society has to educate itself. Apart from raising the educational level of the average citizen, it must try to create an intelligentsia of adequate size and competence, which comes from all strata of society and whose loyalties and aspirations are rooted to the Indian soil. 1.69-73  5 Social, Moral and Spiritual Values. The education system should emphasize the development of fundamental social, moral and spiritual values. From this point of view:  (a) the Central and State Governments should adopt measures to introduce education in moral, social and spiritual values in all institutions under their (or local authority) control on the lilies recommended by the University Education Commission and the Committee on Religious and Moral instruction;  (b) the privately managed institutions should also be expected to follow suit;  (c) apart from education in such values being made an integral part of school programmes generally, some periods should be set apart in the time-table for this purpose. They should be taken, not by specially recruited teachers but by general teachers, preferably from different communities, considered suitable for the purpose. It should be one of the important objectives of training institutions to prepare teachers for this:  (d) the university departments in Comparative Religion should be specially concerned with the ways in which these values can be taught wisely and effectively and should undertake preparation of special literature for use by students and teachers.  6 Education about Religions. It is necessary for a multi religious democratic State to promote a tolerant study of all religions so that its citizens can understand each other better and live amicably together. A syllabus Living well chosen information about each of the major religions should be included as a part of the course in citizenship or as part of general education to be introduced in schools and colleges up to the first degree. It should highlight the fundamental similarities in the great religions of the world and the emphasis they place on the cultivation of certain broadly comparable moral and spiritual values. It would be a great advantage to have a common course on this subject in all parts  36  of the country and common textbooks which should be prepared at the national level by the competent and suitable experts in each religion. 1.74-80  37  CHAPTER II  THE EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM STRUCTURE AND STANDARDS  2.01 In this chapter we shall deal mainly with the structure or the pattern of the educational course, the duration of the total course and of its different stages, better utilization of time and other educational facilities, the necessity of continually raising standards at all stages and the provision of all the three channels of education-full-time, part time and own-time'-on an adequate scale.  2.02 To begin with, we would like to state our approach to the problems of structure and standards. The standards in any given system of education at a given time depend upon four elements: (1) the structure or the division of the educational pyramid into different levels or stages and their interrelationships; (2) the duration or total period covered by the different stages; (3) the extent and quality of essential inputs such as teachers, curricula, methods of teaching and evaluation, equipment and buildings; and (4) the utilization of available facilities. All these elements are interrelated, but they are not of equal significance. For instance, the structure, which may be regarded as the skeleton of the educational system, is of the least importance. The duration or total period of education plays a more significant role; but it becomes crucial only when the available facilities are utilized to the full and no further improvement can be expected without the addition of time. The quality of different inputs is even more important, and with an improvement in these, it is possible to raise the standards considerably without affecting the structure or increasing the duration. But the utilization of available facilities is probably the most significant of all the elements on which standards depend. For any self-accelerating process of development, it is essential in the first place to improve efficiency at the level of the existing inputs and to add more inputs only if they are crucial to the process. An increase of inputs assumes significance only at a later stage.  2.03 In this context, it may be interesting to note that until recently, the general tendency everywhere has been to overrate the importance of the duration of the school course. There is a reason for this. When the quantum of knowledge covered in the school was not very large, the pace of school work was leisurely, and when one learnt more outside school than within school, it was natural to suppose that the longer one stayed at school the better one gained in knowledge and maturity. All this has changed now. The knowledge explosion has imposed an altogether new pressure on schools and colleges. Formal education now plays a much greater part than it did previously at any time in history and the efficiency of the educational system has become a very important factor. Machlup, in his monumental study on the Production and Distribution of Knowledge in the United States (The Princeton University Press, 1962) has observed that the learning process in school in the United States could and ought to be accelerated. He has vigorously argued that the educational objectives now attained in 12 years of schooling could be achieved in 9 or 10 years. This would mean a saving every year of tens of billions of dollars. Besides, it will save the precious time of students and teachers. This 'time saving' is becoming increasingly important as there is so much more to learn in a  38  fast knowledge-expanding world. The compression of the school course would also help in the development of satisfactory working habits and powers of concentration and application. Machlup says that reducing the school duration from the present 12 to 9 or 10 years does not mean that the school course is to be cut down. 'Nothing is to be cut out; on the contrary, more is to be put 'into the curriculum. But the students have to get a faster start and a continuous stretch of their minds. 'We are informed that some schools in New York City are experimenting on the reduction of the school duration.  2.04 The observations of Jerome B. Weisner, former Science Adviser to the President of the USA, are pertinent in this context. He says14: Many people are impressed by the fact that the Soviet Union's ten-year cycle of primary and secondary education requires that all students must take five years of physics, six years of mathematics, three years of biology, and four years of chemistry, with the course content of the work during the last two years being comparable to that of the usual introductory courses in these subjects offered in our liberal arts colleges. By contrast our corresponding school period contains twelve rather than ten years but provides on the average only one-fifth as much training in mathematics and the sciences. There is insufficient evidence to show that the intensity of early Soviet scientific training is either necessary or desirable, particularly if it involves sacrifices of some emphasis on the humanities, but it is evident that the standard programme in our schools is far from optimum.  2.05 It has also to be noted that the broad pattern of education in our country, which was imported from abroad, is still in the nature of an exotic plant. There is hesitation and reluctance, and sometimes even fear, about making any radical changes unless these are on the model of what is happening abroad. We have to outgrow this attitude and to begin regarding the educational pattern as our own; and we should introduce changes in it on the basis of our own indigenous thinking, after taking into account what is happening outside but without being dominated by it.  2.06 It is in the light of these fundamental principles that the proposals made in this chapter should be viewed.  STRUCTURE AND DURATION  2.07 The questions on structure and duration were those on which the Commission received perhaps the largest volume of advice and suggestions. They are questions to which previous commissions and committees dealing with the problems of education on a national scale have devoted considerable attention. There are two principal reasons for  14Daedalus, 1965, p. 534.  39  this widespread and continuous concern about the structure of the educational system. One is the general desire that the present somewhat confusing variety of patterns of school and higher education should be ended. The other is the popular belief that the total period of the educational course and the duration of its different stages have a direct bearing on the quality of the education imparted. We have been repeatedly told that, if there is a uniformity in the educational pattern and an extension in the total period of schooling, it will be possible to bring about a general rise in the standards of attainment. These contentions are of considerable importance and merit close examination.  2.08 The Higher Secondary Pattern. It may be instructive in this connection to look briefly at the results of one serious effort made since Independence to carry out a plan for the reorganization of the educational structure. As a result of the Report of the Secondary Education Commission, a decision was taken to develop a national pattern of school classes covering eleven years-five years of lower primary, three years of upper primary and three years of higher secondary classes. This was to be followed by a three-year course for the first degree in arts and science and a further two-year course for the second degree. The upgrading of high schools in accordance with what is popularly known as the higher secondary pattern and the introduction of the three-year degree course in universities have been significant changes in the educational structure over the last ten years. But while the three-year degree course has been introduced everywhere except in the State of Uttar Pradesh15 and the University of Bombay, the same success has not attended the efforts to convert high schools into higher secondary schools. In spite of the offer of Central assistance, only five States have implemented the proposal so far, while the others have either not accepted it at all, or having decided to accept it in the first instance, have gone back on their earlier decision. Only about 25 per cent of the total number of secondary schools in the country were converted to the higher secondary pattern by the end of the third plan. Many of these conversions are purely notional in the sense that the necessary facilities in terms of teachers, libraries and laboratories have not yet been provided. What is particularly relevant to our discussion here is that no uniform pattern of school and college classes has emerged as a result of the reorganization and there is almost as great a variety of patterns today as there was when the scheme of reorganization was first launched. This will be seen from the data given in Table 2.1 and in the two charts on pages 50 and 51.  15Excluding Central Universities.  40  TABLE 2.1. PATTERN OF SCHOOL AND COLLEGE CLASSES IN DIFFERENT STATES (1965-66)  Duration of stage in years Lower Higher Higher First State primary primary Secondary PUC secondary degree Total  Andhra Pradesh 5 3 3 1 4 3 15 Assam & Nagaland 5 3 4 1 5 3 16 Bihar, Gujarat & Maharashtra 7(a) 4 1 3(b) 15 Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab, Rajasthan & West Bengal 5 3 2 1 3 3 14 Kerala 4 3 3 2 3 15 Madhya Pradesh 5 3 3 3 14 Madras 5 3 3 1 3 15 Mysore 4 3 3 1 4 3 14 Orissa 5 2 4 1 3 15 Uttar Pradesh 5 3 2 2(c) 2 14  (a) Integrated primary course, there being no separate middle schools. (b) In the University of Bombay there is a two-year intermediate course followed by a two-year degree course.  (c) Refers to Intermediate colleges.  N.B. (1) In totalling up the duration of each stage, please include (i) Secondary and PUC or (ii) Higher Secondary, but not both.  (2) Among the Union Territories, Delhi, Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands have adopted the higher secondary pattern. The other Union Territories usually follow the pattern of the State with whose Secondary Board or Universities they coordinate their educational programmes (e.g., Himachal Pradesh follows Punjab).  2.09 Some witnesses who gave evidence before the Commission were of the view that the higher secondary pattern had not been given a fair trial. They believed that frequent changes of policy with regard to the educational structure were undesirable and that, instead of experimenting further with new patterns, it would be better to implement the higher secondary scheme itself more effectively all over the country. But a large majority were extremely critical of the scheme for the following reasons, among others:  (1) Specialization, which should not be introduced till after class X or the age of 16, begins too early in the pattern (after class IX or at the age of 13 or 14).  41  (2) The three-year integrated course in the higher secondary classes leads to a good deal of unnecessary and increase in expenditure, as a child, who might otherwise have stepped off into the world of work or a vocational course at the end of class V, is now forced to go up to class XI.  (3) The expectations that standards would improve as a result of the reorganization have not been generally realized. Qualified teachers are unwilling to work in higher secondary classes because of lower salaries, and even where salaries are equal, because of lower status. Moreover, for reasons other than educational, a number of high schools have been upgraded to the higher secondary pattern without any appreciable improvement in their accommodation and equipment or in the qualifications of their staff.  (4) The experiment which is costly in itself has led in certain areas to an increase in expenditure in other directions. For instance, it was found almost impossible in practice to downgrade an intermediate college to a higher secondary school, so that intermediate college had to be raised to the costlier degree Similarly, the decision to convert, over a period of time, all high schools to the higher secondary pattern created pressures. Even small rural high schools, which under the previous system would have been more efficient and economical as ten-class institutions, were upgraded to the higher secondary status and became both costly and less efficient.  2.10 Uniformity of Pattern. A number of different proposals for the reorganization of the educational structure were placed before the Commission. Most of these recommended a uniform pattern of school and college classes in all parts of the country. It may be pointed out in this connection that the Committee on Emotional Integration stated in their Report (1962) as follows:  We consider that in the overall interest of our student population there should be a common pattern of education in the country which will minimize confusion and coordinate and maintain standards. 4  42  43  44  This view has been gaining considerable ground in recent years. The concept of a national system of education has been increasingly linked with the adoption of a uniform educational pattern, and a belief has grown that such uniformity is essential for raising standards.  2.11 We have recommended elsewhere16 certain steps that should be taken for the coordination of educational standards at the school stage in the different States. But we do not believe that it is necessary or desirable to impose a uniform pattern of school and college classes in all parts of the country. There are several characteristic features of the Indian situation, such as the vastness of the country and the immense diversity of local conditions and traditions, that demand a certain element of flexibility in the educational structure. We are aware of other national systems of education which have a variety of educational patterns. Even in a country of small size such as the United Kingdom, for example, the pattern in England (generally thirteen years of school education followed by a three-year course for the first degree) is different from that in Scotland (twelve years of school education followed by a four-year course for the first degree). In our country, where the different States are at unequal levels of development, a uniform pattern might be above the resources and real needs of the backward areas and below the capacity and requirements of the advanced areas and might operate to the disadvantage of both.  2.12 Lengthening the Duration of Schooling. A second popular demand that has been stressed in proposals for structural reorganization received by the Commission is related to lengthening the total duration of school and higher education. This demand, it may be pointed out, is not related to the professional degrees such as engineering or medicine, the total duration of the study for which is not less than 16 years and is about the same as in most of the educationally advanced countries. This demand 'only refers to the first degrees in arts and science, which are now taken four years after the matriculation or an equivalent examination (or three years after the higher secondary course of eleven years), and the contention put forward is that this duration should be lengthened to not less than five years after the matriculation (or four years after the higher secondary). This view, it must be pointed out, accords with the thinking of several expert bodies on the subject. As far back as in 1919, the Calcutta University Commission proposed that the dividing line between the university and the secondary school should be drawn at the intermediate examination, which came after twelve years of education. Similarly, the University Education Commission (1948) recommended that students should be admitted to the university after the completion of twelve years of study, and that the first degree course should be of three years' duration. According to the Committee on Emotional Integration (1962), the eleven-year period of school education was inadequate preparation for entrance to the university, and the lengthening of the course by one year was deemed necessary. At the conference of the State Education Ministers held in 1964, it was resolved that 'a twelve-year course of schooling before admission to the degree course was the goal towards which the country must work'. We are in full agreement with these recommendations.  16 Vol.II, Chapter X.  45  2.13 Reorganization of the Educational Structure. The kind of reorganization suggested above, which involves a lengthening of the duration of school education, cannot obviously be effected within a short period. The vastness of the country and the variety of its educational patterns make the task a formidable one, and the pressure of more urgent claims on the limited educational resources adds to the complexity of the problem. We recommend that the reorganization should be carried out through a phased programme spread over at least twenty years. The first step in this direction would be the abandon ing of the present higher secondary pattern in which specialization begins in class IX, and the institution of a new higher secondary course beginning in class Xi. Along with this measure, which should be completed by the end of the Fourth Plan period, a systematic attempt should be made to transfer the pre-university course at present located in universities and affiliated colleges, where it tends to depress standards of higher education, to secondary schools, where it rightly belongs. The next step would be to lengthen the total duration by adding a year to the higher secondary course. All these measures are discussed in detail in a later section of this chapter.  2.14 We visualize a flexible educational structure covering   a pre-school stage of one to three years;  a primary stage of seven or eight years divided into two sub-stages-a lower primary stage of four or five years and a higher Primary stage of three years   a lower secondary or high school stage of three or two years in general education or of one to three years in vocational education;   a higher secondary stage of two years of general education or one to three years of vocational education;  a higher education stage having a course of three years or more for the first degree, followed by courses of varying durations for the second or research degrees. The organization of pre-primary education is dealt with separately in Chapter VII. We shall now deal with details of the reorganization at the school and the higher education stages. REORGANIZATION OF SCHOOL EDUCATION  2.15 The First Ten Years. The primary and secondary schools will be of various types. The largest single group amongst them will consist of lower primary schools. A smaller number-about one in three-will provide education up to the end of the higher primary stage and these would necessarily include the lower classes. When the present higher secondary pattern is abandoned, most of the secondary schools-about three-fourths-would provide education up to class X and may begin at any convenient point lower down; and the remaining one fourth will be higher secondary schools providing education up to university entrance. The existing position, however, is quite different from this and shows considerable variations in the structure of the school system until the public examination at the end of the lower secondary stage is reached. A reference to chart on page 55 shows that this external examination, which is known by different names but which we shall call the high school examination, comes after ten to twelve years: two States (Assam and  46  Nagaland) have the examination after twelve years; six States (Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Madras, Maharashtra and Orissa) have it after eleven years; and the remaining eight States (Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh17, Mysore, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal) have it after ten years. No systematic study has yet been made for comparing the standards of attainment of the candidates at the examinations held in the different regions. But these are broadly comparable and, for administrative purposes, all these examinations are regarded as equivalent.  2.16 It will be seen from the chart that in Assam and Nagaland, the first two classes are called A and B, and it is the next ten classes that are numbered consecutively as classes I to X. Since the Governments of the two States themselves seem to treat classes A and B as Infant classes and separate them from the other ten classes, the school stage leading to the high school examination in these States may be regarded as covering a period of ten years. In the six States which have an eleven-year school course, it is more appropriate to regard class I as a pre-primary class, particularly where the age of admission is less than six years. We believe that this pre-primary class is an advantage which these States possess. We recommend that they should try to retain it as such, organize the learning experiences therein on the play-way pattern rather than on the formal pattern, and extend it downwards, wherever possible, to cover a period of two years. We also suggest that the other eight States may try to provide pre-primary education of one year or more below class I to the extent possible, subject to the availability of financial resources.  2.17 As we visualize, (1) the first ten years of schooling, covering a. primary stage of seven or eight years and a lower secondary stage of three or two years, will provide a course of general education without any specialization;  (2) the primary stage will be Preceded, wherever possible, by pre-primary education of one to three years;  (3) the age of admission to class I will ordinarily be not less than 6+;  (4) at the end of the primary stage, a proportion of students will step off the school system and enter working life (about 20 per cent); some more will step out off the stream of general education into different vocational courses whose duration may range from one to three years (about 20 per cent); and those remaining will continue further in the stream of general education (about 60 per cent);  (5) the ten years of school education will be followed by all external examination;  (6) the standard at the end of the ten years will be broadly comparable in respect of curriculum and level of attainment to the national standard laid down for the end of this stage; (7) at the end of the ten years of school education, a proportion of students will step off the school system and enter working life (about 40 per cent); some more will step  17This examination is not held at present in Madhya Pradesh where all the schools are of the higher secondary status. But it is proposed to reintroduce it in 1967.  47  48  out off the stream of general education and enter vocational courses =duration will be one to three years (about 30 per cent); and those remaining will continue further in the stream of general education whose duration will be one, and ultimately two years (about 30 per cent).  2.18 Modifications of the Higher Secondary Pattern. We attach great significance to changes that have to be made in the existing higher secondary pattern in the light of the proposals for reorganization made above.  (1) As has already been stated, the system of 'streaming' in schools of general education, which now begins in class IX, should be given up and no attempt at specialization should be made till after class X. This will need a considerable reorganization of the existing curricula of the higher secondary schools.  (2) The idea that every secondary school should be raised to the higher secondary status should also be abandoned. It has been possible to upgrade all the high schools in Delhi because it is a metropolitan area. Such wholesale conversion of schools has also been carried out in Madhya Pradesh; but the cost has been very heavy in terms of deterioration of standards as well as of financial outlays. In a country where rural areas predominate, it is unwise to try to raise every high school to the higher secondary status. We visualize, as a permanent feature of the educational system, secondary schools of two types: high schools providing the ten-year course described above, and higher secondary schools which in due course will offer a twelve year course of education. With a view to concentrating resources and raising standards effectively, it is only the bigger and better type of high school that should be upgraded. If one-fourth of the total number of high schools were raised to the higher secondary status, they would meet all the needs of the situation, even on the assumption that there would be no pre-university courses in the colleges in the future. An essential requirement is that the institutions should be large, centrally located and equitably distributed between the urban and the rural areas. It would also be desirable to review the status of all existing higher secondary schools, and where these are too small and uneconomic or of very poor quality, they may be reconverted into high schools.  (3) There should be, as a rule, no integrated course of studies beginning with class IX. Classes IX and X will now form part of the first ten years of general education, and classes XI and XII (and during the transitional period, class XI only), which will provide for specialized studies in different subjects at the higher secondary stage, will become an independent, self-contained unit like the Sixth Form in England.  (4) There will be an external examination at the end of class X to mark the termination of the first ten years of general education. Therefore, a student studying in a ten-year high school will have to appear for two external examinations at the end of classes X and XI-at the interval of one year. This handicap will be removed with the extension of the higher secondary course to two years.  49  (5) Existing higher secondary schools with a well-organized integrated course in classes IX to XI may be permitted to carry on, if they so desire, with such a course until they add class XII. It will not be obligatory for the students of such schools to appear for an examination at the end of class X. They may take one final examination at the end of class XI or take it in two parts at the end of classes X and XI.  2.19 Vocational Courses at the End of the Primary Stage. It has been stated above that about 20 per cent of the students will leave the educational system and join working life at the end of the primary stage and that about an equal proportion will step off from the stream of general education and join vocational courses. It will be necessary to provide adequate facilities for suitable forms of vocational education, either on a part-time or on a full-time basis, for these students. This problem will be discussed in greater detail elsewhere.18  2.20 Courses Corresponding to the Higher Secondary Stage. The name, duration, location and control of courses corresponding to the higher secondary stage vary from State to State. In Uttar Pradesh, the course is designated as 'Intermediate' and the duration is two years. It is located either in the top classes of secondary schools or in the bottom classes of degree colleges and its academic control is vested in the Board of High School and Intermediate Examinations. In Kerala, the course is provided in institutions called 'Junior Colleges', which are sometimes independent and sometimes attached to affiliated colleges, and its control vests with the university. In Madhya Pradesh, where all secondary schools have been raised to the higher secondary pattern, there is no course at this stage outside the higher secondary schools. In States where the higher secondary pattern is adopted but all high schools have not been raised to the higher secondary status, the stage is provided as class XI in the higher secondary schools and pre-university courses in colleges. All other States provide a pre-university course exclusively located in colleges and controlled by the universities.  2.21 In discussing the proposed reorganization of the educational structure, we pointed out that two main reforms were needed at this stage:   the transfer of the pre-university courses from the universities and the colleges to the schools; and  the lengthening of the duration of the courses of general education uniformly to two years.  In our view, the simpler and more efficient way of carrying out these reforms would be to take up their implementation in two successive stages. In the first stage, the pre university, intermediate or junior college courses should be transferred from higher education to school education in a period of ten years (1966-75); in the second, their duration should be lengthened, in situ as it were, in a fifteen year period beginning with the Fifth Plan (1971-85).  18Chapter VII  50  2.22 Transfer of the Pre-University Course. We attach great significance to the location, exclusively in the schools, of all the courses that form part of higher secondary education. When the higher secondary pattern was first recommended, the pre-university course was introduced only as a transitional measure. Unfortunately, the transition threatens to become permanent, and even today about 40 per cent of the total enrolment in the universities and affiliated colleges is in the intermediate or pre-university courses. This is a great evil from all points of view. It is bad for the universities and colleges as their resources and energies are being improperly utilized and even wasted in doing what is essentially the work of secondary schools. It is bad for the secondary schools because they are weakened by being deprived of a stage which could give them good teachers and facilities, with the result that they are obliged to do a good deal of work which ought to have been done at the primary stage. It is bad for the students because they are now required to enter universities at too early an age, and compelled to learn through methods of higher education which are beyond their capacity and more suited to maturer students. We, therefore, strongly recommend that the pre-university course, irrespective of its duration, should first be transferred to the school on a high priority basis-this transfer to be completed by the end of the Fifth Five Year Plan at the latest.  2.23 The following measures may be adopted to bring about this transfer:  (1) The responsibility for transferring all pre-university or intermediate work from the universities and affiliated colleges should be placed on the University Grants Commission, which should be asked to prepare a phased programme, to be spread over not more than ten years, for the purpose. A beginning should be made with the universities and the postgraduate colleges which should be required to shed this work as soon as practicable. This policy should then be extended to degree colleges, where the enrolments at this stage should be frozen at a certain time, after which the colleges would be required to taper them off as their enrolments at the undergraduate stage begin to grow. Beyond the Fourth Plan, the opening of new pre-university or inter mediate classes in the universities and affiliated colleges should not be permitted. The University Grants Commission and the State Governments should be requested to reduce gradually their allotment of funds earmarked for this stage of education and to stop them completely by the end of the Fifth Plan.  (2) While these steps are being taken, arrangements should be made to start the higher secondary class or classes in selected schools. The responsibility for making these arrangements should be placed on the State Education Departments, which should work out a proper programme for the purpose in consultation with the universities in the State. Good high schools should be selected and given adequate grant-in-aid to start a higher secondary class or classes as a self-contained unit which is not to be integrated with the lower classes, so that students from other high schools may join it. A scheme of this type has been tried in Mysore and found to work well. Recurring grants for this purpose should be made available to each selected institution one year in advance so that the preliminary arrangements can be satisfactorily completed in time.  51  (3) Most of the Boards of Secondary Education will have to be reconstituted to accept the responsibility for the higher secondary stage, and in some cases, their Acts will have to be amended. We shall discuss this matter in detail in Chapter X.  2.24 This programme of transfer will not involve any wastage. The universities and the affiliated colleges from which the pre university courses will disappear will be able to utilize the existing facilities so released for the purpose of expanded admissions in undergraduate classes. For creating the new facilities required at the school stage, however, a much larger investment of resources is needed. The nonrecurring expenditure will be much greater, because most of the secondary schools are in a very bad shape at present. Even with regard to recurring expenditure, there will be an overall increase, because the income from fees may show a fall after a transfer of these classes to the schools. But the advantage of this additional investment will be spread, to some extent, over a very large proportion of the student population at the secondary stage and the benefit to society in terms of a better output from secondary education, will be much greater. There should, therefore, be no hesitation in incurring the somewhat larger expenditure involved in the execution of this programme.  2.25 Programme for Lengthening of Duration. Our second proposal in this regard is that, in all the States except Uttar Pradesh and Kerala, the duration of the higher secondary course should be lengthened to two years through a phased programme spread over twenty years and divided into two stages. The first stage, covering a period of five years, should be devoted to securing a better utilization of existing facilities and to making the needed preparation for a successful implementation of this important reform. Even during this period, selected higher secondary schools should be permitted to add the twelfth year, and some high schools of good quality and possessing the necessary facilities may be allowed to introduce the two-year higher secondary course as pilot projects. The second stage will cover a span of fifteen years; the programme of extending the duration should begin in the Fifth Plan, gather momentum in the following decade, and be completed by the end of the Seventh Plan.  2.26 Some explanation is necessary for the first stage of implementation referred to above, which implies a postponement of the actual programme of lengthening the duration to the Fifth Plan. We recommend such postponement for three important reasons:  (1) The first reason is that of priority. There are three possible choices in school or higher education in the next five years: qualitative improvement of general education (with special emphasis on raising the salaries and qualifications of teachers); vocationalization of secondary and higher education; or lengthening of the duration of the total period of general education. in our opinion, the first two of these are of far greater urgency and may absorb all the additional resources likely to be available during the next five years.  (2) The second reason is our anxiety for improving the utilization of the time already available before the duration of the school course is lengthened. We would emphasize that a hasty addition of one year to secondary education will not lead to qualitative  52  improvement unless there is a proper climate of hard work in the educational institutions. Moreover, 'time' is only one of the 'inputs' that can bring about improvement in quality. There are several other 'inputs' that are necessary for raising standards, e.g., motivation of students, competence of teachers, upgraded curricula, better methods of teaching and evaluation, improved textbooks and teaching materials and adequate equipment, buildings and other physical facilities. Qualitative improvement will result from the cumulative effect of all these factors. If they are of the right kind, an increase in the duration will certainly add to the improvement in quality; but if they are not, the extension of the course by a year may only mean further wastage.  (3) The third reason is related to the need to make advance preparation for the lengthening of the duration. In our opinion, it will be nothing short of wasting scarce resources if State Governments embark on this programme without preparatory work. This requires (a) that State Governments should take the necessary steps, right from the moment the proposal is accepted, to expand postgraduate education and to prepare the needed teachers; and (b) that they should select, by way of a pilot project, good secondary or higher secondary schools and permit them to add two or one-year courses, as the case may be. On the completion of these courses, the students should be able to join the under graduate courses at the appropriate points. This will be broadly equivalent to the 'advance placement programme in the USA. We think that it will be of considerable help to several students who would prefer to work for some time longer with their own school teachers and in their own school atmosphere rather than transfer themselves abruptly to a new and unfamiliar environment.  2.27 In this connection, it is 'interesting to note that the Committee on Higher Education in the United Kingdom, after considering a somewhat similar suggestion for lengthening the duration of the first degree course in the United Kingdom from three to four years, turned it down principally on the ground that a general extension of the course would not be justified while students were not making proper use of the vacations. This reinforces the view that the proper policy to be adopted in this matter, especially in a developing country, is to increase the duration only after all steps have been taken to maximize the utilization of the time available. It is for this reason that we have recommended the postponement of the programme of lengthening the duration to the Fifth Plan. But once the utilization is improved and necessary preparations made, the programme should be started on a big scale and completed by 1985.  2.28 Vocationalization at the Higher Secondary Stage. We must emphasize particularly the need to vocationalize higher secondary education and to expand the vocational courses to cover about half of the total enrolment at this stage. A large variety of terminal courses should be organized, varying in duration from one to three years. They will include courses for the training of primary and pre primary teachers; courses conducted by the industrial training institutions for a large number of trades for which the completion of studies in class X is the minimum qualification; courses in agriculture and industry which will train the middle level of personnel needed; courses for training paramedical/health personnel; courses for secretariat work; and courses in home science.  53  It is such courses that will make secondary education mainly terminal. The problem is discussed in detail elsewhere.19  2.29 To Sum Up. We recommend that  (1) the higher secondary stage should be extended to cover a period of two years and should be located exclusively in the schools;  (2) steps should be taken to implement this reform through a phased programme spread over the next 20 years (1966-85);  (3) as a first step in this direction, the pre-university course, irrespective of its duration, should be transferred from the colleges to the schools on a high priority basis within the next ten years;  (4) simultaneously, attempts should be made in the Fourth Five Year Plan for improving the utilization of the existing period to the best extent possible, for the preparation of teachers for the two-year course by expanding and improving the postgraduate stage, and for the working out of pilot projects with two-year higher secondary courses in selected secondary schools;  (5) with the beginning of the Fifth Five Year Plan (1971 72), the implementation of the programme should start on a large scale and it should be completed by the end of the Seventh Plan (1985-86); and  (6) provision should also be made from the very outset for the introduction of different types of vocational courses at the higher secondary stage, varying in duration from one to three years, which would prepare young persons for employment.  The changes proposed here have been shown graphically in the chart on page 65.  REORGANIZATION AT THE UNIVERSITY STAGE  2.30 Prior to 1947, the pattern of higher education was largely uniform in all parts of the country. The duration of the course leading to the first degree in arts and science was two years, and this was followed by a two-year course leading to the second degree. But several changes have been introduced into the pattern since Independence. The most important is that the duration of the course for the first degree in arts, science and commerce has been lengthened to three years in all the universities except those in Uttar Pradesh and the University of Bombay, which still provide the two-year degree course after the Intermediate Examination. One or two universities have experimented with an honours course in certain subjects, covering a period of four years in the aggregate.  19Chapter XV.  54  Again, the degree courses in professional subjects are generally longer than the courses for the degrees in arts and science. The agricultural and the engineering courses extend to four and five years respectively after the pre university course and the medical course has an even longer duration.  2.31 Proposals for Reorganization. Since progress in higher education lies through freedom to experiment, there can be no objection to this variety. The principal criticism of higher education is directed, however, not so much against the pattern of organization as against the comparatively low standards of the degrees awarded by the Indian universities in arts, commerce and science. The causes for these low standards are discussed in a later section.20 We are concerned here only with the question of the structural reorganization necessary at the university stage for the improvement of standards. The following proposals are made in this connection:  (1) The duration of the first degree course should not be less than three years. Apart from this, there should be no rigidity about the duration of courses in higher education. These may vary from university to university, and even in the same university, from subject to subject. The duration of courses for the second degree may be two or three years.  (2) In some universities, strong 'graduate schools' providing a three-year M.A./M.Sc./M.Com. degree course may be established in certain subjects. For the sake of convenience, these courses may be designated as honours courses or they may be given some other suitable name. If they are properly organized and a careful selection of students is made, they will be able to produce excellent personnel for the teaching faculty and for high-grade research.  (3) A beginning should also be made with the organization of four-year special courses for the first degree in selected subjects. The first year of these courses will be the same as the first year of the present three-year degree course. But students will be selected, at the end of that year, for admission to a further three-year special course leading to the first (special) degree in, the subject. The experiment should be tried, in the first instance, in the university departments only and in subjects where teachers and facilities are available. In the light of the experience gained, it may be extended subsequently to other subjects and to good affiliated colleges doing postgraduate work.  (4) The above proposal will need to be modified in Uttar Pradesh, where the immediate problem is to raise the duration of the first degree course in arts, commerce and science from two to three years. Since large financial and personnel problems are involved, we suggest that this programme should be spread over 15 to 20 years. A beginning may be made with the establishment of graduate schools and challenging three year courses to be introduced in selected subjects and selected universities; and as funds and teachers become available, the programme should be extended to affiliated postgraduate colleges doing good work and to other subjects.  20Chapter XI,  55  (5) Suitable 'bridges' should be built between these new and longer courses and the existing courses of shorter duration.  56  (6) Some incentives will have to be provided to students for undergoing these longer and higher level courses.21 For instance, a more liberal provision of scholarships should be made for these longer courses for the first and the second degrees. Students completing the courses should be entitled to advance increments in the usual scales. They should receive preferential consideration in recruitment; and as soon as the supply becomes adequate, the recruitment of teachers should be restricted to the holders of these degrees only. It need hardly be stressed that the admissions to these courses should be made on a highly selective basis.  2.32 Just as we laid considerable stress on the vocationalization of secondary education we would also like to emphasize the importance of professional education at the university stage. This is of particular urgency in the Indian context where the emphasis in higher education in the past has been on training persons mainly for white-collar jobs. Our proposals on this subject are discussed elsewhere.22  UTILIZATION OF FACILITIES  2.33 The principal object of the changes in structure and duration which have been discussed above is to raise standards. In this context, however, it is essential to note that   structure and duration play a significant but secondary role in improving standards;   the changes proposed in structure and duration will be rather slow in making an impact on quality, because their full implementation has been spread over twenty years; and   the most serious weakness of the existing educational system lies, not in its structure, but in its feebleness. We are getting relatively much less than what we should from the system as it exists and the resources that go into it. No reorganization of structure or addition of time can remedy this basic weakness.  It is, therefore, necessary to place a much greater emphasis in all our plans of educational reconstruction on programmes of intensive utilization of facilities available, and on improving the extent and quality of the inputs other than time, and particularly on the improvement of teachers. These will yield immediate and far-reaching results.  2.34 It will be generally agreed that the facilities in our educational system, deficient as they are, are not utilized to their full advantage. There is much that can be done to improve standards even in existing circumstances by lengthening the school day, increasing the number of working days, making full use of the long vacations, and  21The three-year honours courses offered formerly by the universities in U.P. did not prove a Success for a variety of reasons, one of them being that the pass course had a duration of two years and admissions to postgraduate courses were open to honours as well as to pass graduates.  22Chapters V, XII, XIV and XV.  57  generally creating a climate of hard and sustained work. The key to rapid national development is dedication and hard work. Educational institutions should give a lead to society in this matter and create the required climate, in the first instance, in the educational system itself.  2.35 Working and Instructional Days. At present, the total number of working days and hours prescribed for educational institutions at all levels is inadequate. What is far worse, a very large proportion of these working days is lost to education for a variety of reasons with the result that the total number of instructional days, i.e., days which are fully utilized for instructional purposes, is often reduced to an absurdly low figure. The details of a study conducted by the Commission to ascertain the number of working days and hours in schools and colleges in different parts of the country (as officially prescribed by the State Education Departments and universities) has been given elsewhere. It shows that there is considerable variation, from area to area, in the total number of working days in a year-these range from 172 to 309 at the school stage and from 120 to 240 at the university stage. The number of holidays given within a school year shows even larger variations from 20 to 75 at the school stage and from 4 to 49 at the university stage. Similarly, the total duration of vacations varies from 36 to 84 days at the school stage and from 62 to 137 at the university stage. The days utilized for examinations (inclusive of preparatory leave) vary from 10 to 77 and the loss on account of celebrations such as foundation days, annual functions of societies, etc is sometimes as high as 40 to 60 days in a year. These facts are a sad reflection on the efficiency of the educational system, and the general under utilization which they represent in a developing economy like ours is tantamount to an unpardonable waste of scarce resources. We, therefore, recommend that the number of instructional days in a year should be increased to about 234 (or 39 weeks) for schools and 216 (or 36 weeks) for colleges (and pre-primary schools).  2.36 Specimen Calendar. In addition, it may be useful to see how this recommendation will be reflected in terms of an academic calendar. For this purpose, we give below a specimen calendar for schools and colleges:  (1) For the schools, the calendar will be somewhat like the following:  July 15-Opening day. (Teachers will attend school one week earlier to make admissions and to prepare plans for the next year.) July 15 to November 30-First working term. (Not more than one week to be lost in admissions') December 1 to December 15-First vacation term of two weeks. December 16 to May 30-Second working term. Teaching to be over by April 15. April 16 to April 30-Guided studies by students to prepare for their examinations. Annual examinations in the first week of May and to be over by the 7th of May (if necessary, the preparatory period may be cut down). Second week of May Vacation term of one week for students while teachers examine papers. May 15 Declaration of results. May 16 to May 30-Guidance classes to students for the new year. July 1 to July 14-Second vacation term of six weeks. (For students who have failed in the annual examinations, special tutorials to be organized during the vacation term, a re examination to be held in the second week of July and the students to be promoted to the next class if they pass.)  58