THE MENACE OF RAGGING  IN  EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS  AND  MEASURES TO CURB IT  Report of the Committee constituted by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India In SLP No. 24295 of 2006.  Contents  Foreword i  iii  1 Background 1  2  2 Methodology 3  8  3 Status of anti-ragging measures 9  25  4 Observations of the Committee 26  45  5 Recommendations 46  71  6 Annexure  I Copy of the Notification constituting the Committee II Final Composiion of the Committee III Notes of the meetings of the Committee IV Results of the Survey among students V Report of the Group of Consultants VI Sample Media Reports VII Status Note from the University Grants Commission VIII Comparison of State Laws IX Incidents of ragging reported in the print media IXA Analysis of reported incidents of ragging.  Foreword  If education, and particularly Higher Education, is to serve as the lever to the great surge forward of the Indian nation, the scourge of ragging which corrodes the vitals of our campuses needs to be curbed. Appreciating this, the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India was pleased to direct us to give suggestions on the means of prevention of ragging in educational institutions. We feel privileged to submit our report on the menace of ragging and measures to curb it.  When we embarked on this task, we did not anticipate the overwhelming response and the enormous interest that would be generated by this topic. Interviews and interactions with academics, students (including victims of ragging), parents, teachers, administrators, employees of universities and colleges, civil society activists, psychologists , sociologists, legal experts, media persons, political representatives, office bearers of student organizations and statutory authorities, representatives of State Governments and local authorities – the list is long – helped us in understanding the enormity of the challenge.  Although we were granted a time-frame of four months to submit our report, and indeed it was possible to do so with the secondary evidence available to us, we express our gratitude to the Hon’ble Supreme Court for granting us the liberty of an additional four weeks so that we could incorporate an interesting analysis of the survey of responses from over ten thousand students. Even at the time of giving finishing touches to this report, many more responses continue to pour in.  We are not the first Committee to go in to the question of ragging. The issue has been studied in the past. Institutions of higher education are also bound by the directions/ guidelines of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the “Vishwa Jagriti Missions” matter. However, the problem has not abated, which is why we had to look into the reasons for the problem of ragging continuing to persist in our campuses. We  cannot claim that we have fully understood all aspects of the constraints that need to overcome; yet the following emerge from our exercise, which may have a reasonable potential to change the situation:  ▪ Primary responsibility for cubing ragging rests with  academic institution themselves  ▪ Ragging adversely impacts the standards of higher education  ▪ Incentives should be available to institutions for curbing the  menace, there should also be disincentives for failure to do  so  ▪ Enrolment in academic pursuits or a campus life should not  immunize any adult citizen from penal provisions of the laws  of the land  ▪ Ragging needs to be perceived as our failure to inculcate  human values from the schooling stage  ▪ Behavioral patterns among students, particularly potential  ‘raggers’, need to be identified  ▪ Measures against raging must deter its recurrence  ▪ Concerted action is required at the level of the school, higher  educational institution, district administration, university,  State and Central Governments to make any curb effective  ▪ Media and the civil society should be involved at all stages  The report contains several specific recommendations based on our observations and analysis; many of which we hope would be useful for implementations and direction by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India. A report of this scope would not have been possible without the support of a large number of willing and committed persons and helpful institutions. It is not possible to name all of them here. However, we would be failing if we did not acknowledge the valuable time spared by all those who attended the interaction sessions with  the Committee across eleven cities. We would also thank Prof. Aruna Broota, Dr. Tanvir Aeijaz and Dr. Rajesh Jha, all of the University of Delhi, Dr. Anupama Bhatnagar of the Ministry of Human Resource Development, the coalition to uproot Ragging from Education (CURE), the society for people’s Action Change and Enforcement (SPACE), the Educational Consultants India (Ltd.) and the Indian Institute of Technology , Kanpur for all their help.  Submitted, this 7th day of May, 2007  1. Background  1.01 In Special Leave Petition No. 24295 of 2006, University of Kerala vs  Council of Principals of Colleges [with SLP (C) No. 24296-24299 of 2004,  W.P. (Crl) No. 173/2006 and SLP (C) No. 14356/2005], the Hon’ble  Supreme Court of India was pleased to direct that a Committee headed by  Shri R.K.Raghavan, former Director, Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)  be notified to give suggestions on means of prevention of ragging in  educational institutions. A copy of the notification No. F.9-98/2006.U-5  dated the 5th December, 2006 is at Annexure I. In accordance with the  orders of the Apex Court, the Committee nominated by it further nominate  two other members – one each from the southern and western regions.  The full composition of the Committee, after the said nominations is at  Annexure II.  1.02 The terms of reference (TOR) of the Committee were to study the various  aspects of ragging; to suggest means and methods of prevention of  ragging; to suggest possible action that can be taken against persons  indulging in ragging; and, to suggest possible action that can be taken  against college/university authorities in the event of ragging.  1.03 In its Interim Order of the 27th November, 2006, the Hon’ble Supreme  Court of India expressed its dismay that notwithstanding the concern  shown by it in Vishwa Jagriti Mission through President Vs. Central  Government through Cabinet Secretary and Ors. (AIR 2001 SC 2793),  “practically very little has been done to prevent the menace of ragging in  educational institutions”. The Apex Court expected the present Committee  to make the recommendations “as to how the provisions already enacted  in several States and Statutes to be framed to prevent the menace, can  effectively eliminate the menace.”  1.04 The Committee was required to submit its Report within four months i.e.  by the 5th April, 2007. However, it had to request the Hon’ble Court  through the Ld. Additional Solicitor General of India, Shri Gopal  Subramanium, to extend the date of submission by another four weeks –  the additional time was needed by the Committee to collate and analyse  several thousand responses it had received from students and institutions  all over the country.  2. The Methodology  2.01 The Committee decided to base its report both from primary as well as  secondary sources of information. The obvious stake-holders identified by  the Committee were : NGOs working in the field of the anti-ragging  movements, student victims of ragging and their parents, students accused  of ragging and their parents, other parents, teachers and hostel wardens,  Heads of institutions, authorities of universities, students  ‘‘‘freshers’’’as  well as senior students, representatives of the student bodies,  representatives of state and central government, press and media  representatives, and other members of the general public.  2.02 It was decided to consult with all cross-sections of stake-holders through  interaction at different state capitals broadly representative of the regional  variations across the country. Accordingly, the Committee visited  Guawahati, Kolkata, Bhopal, Mumbai, Jaipur, Kochi, Chennai, Patna,  Lucknow, Hyderabad and Bangaluru. The Committee also met for  consultations on two occasions in Delhi with NGOs and experts.  Annexure III gives minutes of the interactions at the places visited by  the Committee. Indeed, the Committee benefited from these interactions –  in particular, in understanding the reasons for the inability to root out the  menace of ragging and associated corrupt practices from our higher  education system.  2.03 A questionnaire was designed in consultation with experts – the  Committee places on record its appreciation of the valuable inputs  received from Prof. Aruna Broota, a leading clinical psychologist and  Professor at the University of Delhi in designing the questionnaire. The  questionnaire was sent to all Universities recognized under the UGC Act  with the request to forward it to all affiliated or constituent Colleges under  them. There was an overwhelming response to the questionnaire  (numbering over 12500 in all), paucity of time has not permitted us to  analyze all of them and as many as 10470 responses could be analyzed.  Results of our analysis is given as Annexure IV. The Constraints of time  has not allowed us a more elaborate survey on all possible dimensions for  a better understanding of issues involved, for example, whether the type of  institution, the nature of programmes of study, the geographical location,  the socio-economic background of students, the gender etc. would make  any difference to the outcomes. The Questionnaire was deliberately kept  simple and, as professionally advised, we had requested institutions and  respondents to maintain anonymity. The questionnaire comprised of two  categories of questions – four of them were qualitative in nature and the  remaining seven were of an objective variety. The Qualitative questions  sought information on the significance attached by the respondents to  their first few days in the college as well as in the hostels, and their  expectations from their new institution as well as from their seniors.  Questions seeking objective responses dealt with the manner of making  new friends, initiative in making friendship with strangers, reaction to  being bullied, propensity to seek attention, willingness to handle abused  relationship, and the desirability of laying down guidelines for defining  manner of interaction between seniors and 'freshers’.  2.04 A web page was specially created by the National Informatics Centre at the  website of the Ministry of Human Resource Development  (http://education.nic.in/feedback/guestbook.asp) for interaction with all  cross-sections of the public. Similarly, all sections of the public were  invited to respond with their views in regard to “ragging” in the light of the  terms of reference of the Committee through Press Note hosted also at the  web site (http://education.nic.in/pressnote.pdf). As many as eleven ‘Press  Notes’ were released in leading news papers one each preceding the visit  undertaken by the Committee for its sittings.  2.05 The Committee also benefited from presentations by Non Government  Organizations – though there are very few of them dedicated to any  serious campaign against ragging. CURE (Coalition to Uproot Ragging  from Education), a non government initiative on the part of a few  dedicated young persons who, as students, had personally suffered on  account of ragging started as a web based discussion group in July, 2001.  CURE, through its web site www.noragging.com and Blog  www.noragging.blogspot.com actively canvassed feed back and related  assistance. It also made available to the Committee the findings of the  “CURE Comprehensive Research Report”.  2.06 CURE, in its report, delineates the problematic of ragging and tries to find  out possible solutions. The report has dealt with definitions and  conceptualization of the problem. It defines ragging by identifying the  menace with three kinds of abuse: verbal, physical and sexual. The  problem is analyzed from various dimensions such as psychological, group  dynamics, sociological, stereotypes and so on.  2.07 The report also deals with the current extent of ragging, focusing mainly  on the methodology, the extent, the outcomes and the place of ragging.  Through a random sample survey taking 64 ragging cases reported since  2005, and classifying these cases into five categories viz – physical,  physical and sexual, sexual, verbal and ‘not known’, the report debunks the  popular myth that sexual and physical ragging is no more prevalent after  the Supreme Court judgment of 2001. It also questions the oversimplified  argument that ragging is an ice-breaker for the ‘fresher’ and claims that  ragging is not a harmless fun, but cuts deep into the mental health of the  ragged. It breaks several stereotypes prevalent in the society about the  ragging. The CURE report tries to underline the fact that the stakeholders  such as seniors, ‘‘freshers’’, college/university authorities, law enforcing  agencies, media and other social organisations, civil society groups must  be collectively involved in eradicating this malaise.  2.08 In its approach to solutions, the CURE report has identified the core issues  to be denial of ragging, lack of clear guidelines, complete helplessness of  ‘‘freshers’’, casteist and regional colouring of incidents, among others . It  recommends establishment of central department and guidelines to  colleges, sensitizing through education particularly sex and legal education  and solving the problem of denial, and support to victims and anti-ragging  organizations.  2.09 Society for People’s Action, Change and Enforcement (SPACE) is also a  Non Government Organization engaged in advocacy and research  campaign to curb ragging since May, 2004 through both field based  interaction with institutions & victim students as well as over the internet  (www.stopragging.org and http://groups.yahoo.com/group/stopragging).  The Committee benefited from the presentation made by the SPACE,  which debates the issue of the definition of ‘ragging’ and focuses on the  nature and the implications of the Hon’ble Supreme Court’s definition of  ragging in the Vishwa Jagriti Mission matter [W.P. (civil) No. 656 of  1998]. Incorporating various aspects in the parameters of ragging the  SPACE report recommends a uniform law against ragging to be enacted by  the Parliament; to establish one or more full time anti-ragging cells at the  central level; anti-ragging cells to start ‘Helplines’; and to arrange for the  counselling of the victims. SPACE advocates that a monitoring mechanism  should be put in place to enforce compliance with the Supreme Court  guidelines and the relevant applicable laws. It also recommends that each  educational institution should present to the National Assessment and  Accreditation Council, an annual report about the compliance with the  status of ragging in their institutions including the number and nature of  ragging related complaints. This Committee acknowledges the assistance  provided by the two Non Government Organizations, CURE and SPACE at  various stages of its work assigned by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India.  2.10 On behalf of the Committee, a Group of six volunteer consultants with  exposure to issues of campus based ragging, whose names and  recommendations are given at Annexure V, were also engaged to go  through the mass of feed-back received in response to the Press Notes  issued on the web site of the Ministry of HRD on behalf of the Committee,  and to come up with recommendations of value for the consideration of  the Committee. Based on the feed back received from various stake  holders, the Group concluded that ragging obtaining in educational  institutions is neither a means of familiarization nor an introduction with  ‘‘freshers’’, but a form of psychopathic behaviour and a reflection of  deviant personalities, which reproduces the entrenched power  configurations prevalent in the civil society. The Group also observed that  the majority of abusive ragging is focused on the genital area and takes on  sexual forms, leading it to comment that ragging is also a manifestation of  widespread sexual repression in our society. Urgent steps need to be taken  to address the above areas. Boarding schools and especially senior  students need to be brought into the ambit of any move which wishes to  check/prevent/ban ragging, as various kinds of bullying and sexually  abusive behaviour, for instance, sodomy, originates at an early age.  2.11 The Committee also consulted with the Secretary of the University Grants  Commission, Member-Secretary of the All India Council of Technical  Education and the Secretary of the Medical Council of India. A brief  account of the submissions made by these statutory regulatory bodies has  been included in this Report at the appropriate place.  2.12 Presentations were made at New Delhi before the Committee by experts  from the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE – represented by  its Secretary), National University of Education Planning and  Administration (NUEPA  represented by its Vice Chancellor), Navodaya  Vidyalaya Sangathan (NVS – represented by its Director), Vidyasagar  Institute of Mental Health And Neuro Sciences (VIMHANS – represented  by Dr. Vinod Nagpal), Indian Law Institute ( ILI – represented by Prof.  Kamala Shankaran), Political Scientist Dr. Tanvir Aeijaz, Clinical  Psychologist Prof. Aruna Broota.  2.13 Presentations were also made at different places visited by the Committee  by representatives of all leading student organizations. The interaction of  the Committee with all stake holders at the places visited by the  Committee as mentioned earlier is given in Annexure III and a glimpse  of the interest shown by stake holders is evident from a sample of media  reports which is at Annexure VI. Equipped with analysis and inputs,  which became available through the process and methodology of wide  ranging consultations and feed back, the Committee proceeded to review  the Status of anti-ragging measures obtaining at present.  3. Status of anti-ragging measures  3.01 The Committee has carefully considered the Report of the Committee  appointed by the University Grants Commission in 1999 for framing  guidelines with regard to combating the menace of ragging in Universities/  Educational Institutions (herein after termed the 1999 Report). It is useful  to recapitulate the 1999 Report to understand the reasons for the  continuing menace of ragging.  3.02 In response to a Public Interest Legislation, filed by the Vishwa Jagriti  Mission for curbing the practice of ragging, the UGC constituted a four  member committee chaired by Prof K P S Unny of the Jawaharlal Nehru  University, New Delhi. The 1999 Report defined ragging along with its  ‘positive’ and negative impacts. While enumerating some of the ‘positive’  impacts of the concept of ragging, the 1999 Report observed that its  negative manifestations had become more prevalent. The report also talks  of various forms of ragging, reasons for ragging and its increasing  incidences, locations vulnerable from the point of view of ragging, and  problems encountered during anti-ragging measures.  3.03 The 1999 Report recommended a PPP (Prohibition – Prevention –  Punishment) approach. It suggested certain guidelines for prevention, law  for prohibition and strict enforcement for punishing the offender(s). In  regard to Prohibition, it recommended enactment of Central and the state  laws, making ragging a cognizable offence and identifying the perverse  forms of ragging under such law(s). It also suggested several  “punishments” commensurate with the severity of the offence. It also  suggested that the Films’ Censor Board and other agencies should  discourage eulogizing of ragging in films and the media. The 1999 Report  also suggested promulgation of Ordinances by academic institutions as an  interim arrangement till anti-ragging statutes and laws could be made.  3.04 The 1999 Report also proposed guidelines for the prevention of ragging. It  recommended that an anti-ragging movement should start from the date  of publication of advertisements for admissions; advertisements should  also carry the message in respect of ban on ragging, and the consequences  of violation; the subsequent stages of admission process should according  to the 1999 Report reinforce the message against ragging through the  prospectus, application forms and admission forms. It also recommended  that an undertaking for not indulging in ragging be made mandatory for  admission to student hostels. It suggested that institutions should take  measures to reduce the dependence of ‘‘freshers’’ on the senior students. It  recommended information booklets to be made available to the ‘‘freshers’’  providing vital information, contact addresses, telephone numbers, as also  information to ‘‘freshers’’ about their rights as a bona fide student of the  institution. The 1999 Report also recommended that ‘‘freshers’’ should be  encouraged to report incidents of ragging.  3.05 The 1999 Report also recommended various actions that ought to be taken  at the commencement of each academic session, like an address by the  Head of the institution (University, College, etc) to wardens, student  activists, parents/guardians, police and faculty, and constituting anti  ragging Vigilance Committees comprising some senior faculty members,  students and wardens. It recommended that Vigilance Committees should  enquire into reported incidents of ragging and a disciplinary committee  should prescribe appropriate punishment, based on which the Head of the  institution should act immediately and promptly. Suo motu action by  Heads of institutions was also suggested in the 1999 Report along with  enhancement of the power of institutional authorities, who could in some  cases be vested with magisterial powers. It also suggested collective  punishment if a perpetrator and/or an abettor could not be identified, with  even onlookers or victims to be penalized for not reporting incidents of  ragging. It was recommended that the institution should not wait for the  action by the police or Courts for undertaking its own punitive measures.  The 1999 Report recommended that the defaulting institution should be  penalized in the form of reduction in grants-in-aid or even disaffiliation. It  emphasized the need for dissemination of information related to the  dehumanizing impact of ragging and punishments for offences of ragging,  through posters as well the media, which should be requested to give  adequate publicity to adverse impact of ragging especially in the months of  July and August every year.  3.06 The 1999 Report had suggested different grades of punishments ( a total of  eleven were suggested), ranging from suspension of offenders from the  institution to a fine of Rs 25,000 and, even rigorous imprisonment up to 3  years depending on the degree of severity of the offence. It was also  suggested that except the punishment of rigorous imprisonment which  Courts alone could award, all other punishments should be awarded by the  institutional authorities themselves. It also recommended some positive  steps and incentives to create an anti-ragging environment; for instance, a  committee may be set up to actively monitor, promote and regulate  healthy interaction between ‘‘freshers’’ and senior students; similarly, the  party to welcome the ‘‘freshers’’ should be organized early at the  commencement of the academic session; increased student-faculty  interaction was also suggested. The 1999 Report also recommended  incentives for the students, wardens and other functionaries; for example  for the students, some marks or grade can be awarded for their anti  ragging activism, similarly, ‘Good Conduct’ and ‘Not Found Indulging In  Any Form Of ragging’ should be some of the elements of sessional  evaluation. It was suggested that for wardens, perks like in-campus  accommodation, free telephone, some honorarium and favourable  performance appraisal for promotion may enhance their commitment to  curb the menace of ragging.  3.07 It may be concluded that the 1999 Report has to an extent diagnosed  several causes leading to persistence of ragging incidents in campuses. The  suggestions and recommendations were also equally exhaustive. Then,  why is it that the problem persists, was the query this Committee raised at  the various interactive forums and in the consultative process adopted by  us. This leads us to look into the status of implementation of the  recommendations of the 1999 Report which derived its strength from the  endorsement of guidelines by the Apex Court in the Jagriti matter. In  order to understand the implementation of Supreme Court’s guidelines  and the UGC’s mandate in respect of the 1999 Report by Universities and  higher educational institutions, the Ministry of Human Resource  Development (MHRD) was approached. The Ministry provided material in  respect of a reply in Parliament by the Hon’ble Minister of Human  Resource Development to a Question on the subject of ragging [Rajya  Sabha Starred Question No. 98 of the 5th March, 2007 ]  3.08 According to information furnished by the MHRD, the University Grants  Commission had circulated the 1999 Report to all universities on the 13th  January, 2000 for necessary action. Similarly, the directions of the  Hon’ble Supreme Court in W.P.(Civil) No. 656 of 1998 [Vishwa Jagriti  Mission] on curbing the menace of ragging in educational institutions have  also been circulated by the University Grants Commission to all the  States/Union Territory Governments and institutions for strict  compliance. These directions of the Apex Court have also been brought to  the notice of all State/UT Governments and Universities and other  institutions coming under its purview by the Central Government  (MHRD). The All India Council of Technical Education (AICTE), it has  been reported, has put up a circular on its web site that “ragging in  educational institutions in any form is banned under law; all the AICTE  approved institutions must ensure that ragging does not take place at their  campuses in any form; should such a case be reported or brought to the  notice of the AICTE, then the Council shall take necessary action including  withdrawal of approval.”  3.09 It has also been informed by the MHRD that no centralized data is being  maintained at present on incidents of ragging. In respect of measures  taken to curb the menace of ragging, it has been mentioned that a strict  vigil is being maintained by the universities and institutions. The  Ordinances of Central Universities also provide for action to be taken in  the event of ragging taking place in the universities. The Central  Government in the Ministry of Human Resource Development (vide F.No.  9-5/2006 – U.II. dated the 11th August, 2006) asked the UGC to issue  appropriate directions to all universities and institutions and also to  consider framing appropriate Regulation in order to prevent the incidence  of ragging. Such Regulation would obviously be binding only on the  Institutions receiving grants-in-aid from the Commission. The UGC was  also advised to consider creating a Cell in the UGC to collect, disseminate  information and to monitor incidents of ragging. Taking serious note of  incidents of ragging which were continuing to come to its notice  notwithstanding specific directions of the Apex Court that it was the  primary responsibility of institutions to curb ragging, the Central  Government drew attention of the Education Secretaries of all States and  Union Territories to the guidelines and directions of the Apex Court (vide  communication F.No. 10-2/99 Desk (U.I.) of the 31st August, 2004).  Similar communication had earlier been sent to all Institutions Deemed to  be Universities and to all the technical educational institutions such as the  IITs, IIMs etc. coming under the purview of the Central Government (vide  communication No. F. No. 2-9/2003 – T.S.I dated the 3rd August, 2004  and vide No. F. 21-10/2004 – U.5 dated the 25th August, 2004). The  Central Government called for stern action against those indulging in  ragging and exemplary punishment is meted out so that incidents are not  repeated. States and educational institutions were called upon to  implement the guidelines. State Governments were also requested to call  for ‘action taken’ reports from institutions. The Committee notes  reluctantly that during its visit to the different States and regions, it did  not come across any serious effort to implement the guidelines of the  Supreme Court in the manner in which the Apex Court had intended so.  3.10 On the 25th March, 2007 the Committee interacted with Dr. T.R. Kem,  Secretary, UGC. He was asked about the arrangements or system, if any, to  monitor incidents of ragging in universities and institutions coming under  the Commission’s purview in terms of the University Grants Commission  Act, 1956. The Committee was informed that while the UGC has not  created any dedicated Cell to deal exclusively with the problem of ragging  in universities and institutions under its purview, the issue was looked  after in the Planning and Coordination Bureau within the UGC. A proposal  with regard to a separate Regulation for prevention of ragging being  prepared for the approval of the Commission in one of its forthcoming  meetings (Dr. Kem mentioned that the next meeting of the Commission  was due in April, 2007 and a suitable proposal would be put up before it).  The Commission has not yet prescribed any reporting format and  therefore no statistics are being maintained at present. The guidelines of  the UGC forming part of the report based on the Supreme Court directions  have been circulated to all universities in the year 2000; the subsequent  communication from the government and the orders of the Supreme Court  are on the website of the Commission. So far there has not been any case  of stoppage of grants by the UGC in respect of any university or institution  for failure to prevent ragging incidents. The Commission has also not  directed any university to disaffiliate any institution on the grounds of not  preventing ragging or for not taking action in the event of ragging. At the  request of the Chairman of the Committee, the UGC has submitted a status  note (Annexure VII) on the implementation of the directions of the  Supreme Court in the Vishwa Jagriti Mission matter (2001) in pursuing its  own guidelines that were endorsed by the Apex Court. It more or less  confirms the above mentioned submission by the Secretary.  3.11 The Committee also interacted with Dr. Narayana Rao, Member Secretary  of the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) on the 25th  March, 2007. He confirmed the Circular put up by the Council at its web  site warning the institutions approved by it of the need to prevent ragging.  According to Dr. Rao, the said Circular has not been issued to each  institution but the Council has circulated its directions that all institutions  should visit the Council’s website at least once a week. He also submitted  that the Council would repeat the Circular. He stated that there were no  instances of ragging that have been reported to the Council by institutions.  On a specific query regarding the mechanism to monitor incidents of  ragging in privately run hostels where students of institutions resided, it  was confirmed by Prof. Rao that there were no regulations pertaining to  the registration of private hostels. [The Committee is however aware that  under the AICTE guidelines at least 25% of male students and at least 50%  of female students must be provided with hostel accommodation by the  management.] The AICTE was also asked to submit status report  regarding the implementation of the Hon’ble Supreme Court’s directions  in regard to curbing and preventing ragging.  3.12 The Committee also heard Lt. Col. A.R.N. Setalvad, Secretary of the  Medical Council of India on the 25th March, 2007, who informed the  Committee that complaints about ragging did not reach the MCI as such  complaints may be reported to the university or the police authorities or  the institutional authorities. He felt that the question whether MCI  considered that ragging could affect the standards of medical education  could be responded to only by the Executive Committee of the Council. Lt.  Col. Setalvad confirmed that no instructions or guidelines had been issued  by the MCI specifically in regard to the menace of ragging. The MCI has  been requested to furnish a status note in regard to the issue of ragging as  well as on some ancillary suggestions that had come up during the course  of the Committee’s interactions with a large cross-section of students and  faculty and other authorities in medical colleges, namely, whether the MCI  had any powers to prescribe a date of commencement of classes for the  second year students through its Regulations? Whether MCI regulations  mention anything about curbing ragging? Whether it was possible to give  ‘‘freshers’’ in 1st MBBS a breather for one or two weeks to settle down  before the 2nd MBBS students arrived on the campus or in hostels? Lt.  Col. Setalvad also submitted that the MCI had to work within the frame  work of the Indian Medical Council Act, and could only recommend  withdrawal of recognition of medical colleges to the Central Government.  He informed that the MCI had recommended the withdrawal of  recognition in as many as 8 cases but since the Government also had to  give notices for showing cause and other procedural formalities, none of  the cases had been finalized yet. On behalf of the Committee, the  Chairman asked Lt. Col. Setalvad whether the MCI believed that it had a  role in combating ragging in medical colleges in the country. If so, what  measures had been taken by the Council thus far and what measures did  they propose to take in the future; and, if the Council felt that it had no  responsibility what were the reasons? Secretary, MCI promised to send the  requisite information which was required to be formulated by the  Executive Committee and the Adhoc Committee of the Council appointed  by the Supreme Court. The MCI have since reported [vide MCI  34(1)/2007-Med./2899 dated the 3rd May, 2007] that the Council at its  meeting on the 28th April, 2007 has resolved as follows:  “The members of the Adhoc Committee appointed by the Hon’ble Supreme  Court and of the Executive Committee of the Council considered the letter dated  3rd April, 2007 received from the Director, Department of Higher Education,  Ministry of HRD, New Delhi and decided to constitute a Sub-Committee  comprising of Dr. Ved Prakash Mishra, Chairman, Post Graduate Committee,  MCI and Vice Chancellor, Datta Meghe Institute of Medical Sciences (Deemed  University), Nagpur; Dr. Indrajit Ray, Principal, Medical College, Kolkata and  Dr. B.P. Dubey, Professor and Head, Department of Forensic Medicine, Gandhi  Medical College, Bhopal and directed the office of the Secretary to convene a  meeting of the Sub-Committee at the earliest so as to place the report of the Sub  Committee before the Executive Committee at its next meeting.”  3.13 The Committee also studied the existing statutory provisions in respect of  ragging in the different States of the country. While executive orders of  State Governments or Ordinances of universities exist in different States,  some States have enacted specific anti-ragging laws. The Committee  compared the existing legislations in Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh,  Maharashtra and West Bengal. The Committee was also informed that  “The Assam Prohibition of Ragging Bill, 1998” passed by the Legislative  Assembly on the 5th December, 1998 to replace the Ordinance of 1998 on  the subject, has not yet been notified.  3.14 The Committee compared the existing State legislations in respect of anti  ragging measures on the following parameters : 1) Purpose of legislation 2)  Ragging as defined in the law 3) The Scheme of prevention 4) Institutional  Mechanism 5) Appellate Forum 6) Nature of Offence 7) Penalties  prescribed 8) Whether Compoundable 9) Whether Rules are notified. A  comparative statement is at Annexure VIII.  3.15 In terms of the purpose of the various State laws, we find that other than  the Chhattisgarh Act, no other State legislation is intended to prevent  ragging – the others only seek to prohibit. Although broadly prohibition  and prevention may appear to be broadly intended to achieve the same  purpose, it is important to understand the subtle difference for our  objectives, between prevention and prohibition. Prevention implies  anticipating the problem of ragging, forestalling the occurrence of it,  taking precautionary measures to make it difficult if not impossible for  ragging to take place. Thus a law against ragging which is preventive in  approach would necessarily create conditions that anticipate, forestall and  make it difficult for ragging to take place – all of which help in the law  becoming a facilitator in enforcing the prohibition of the menace of  ragging. While prevention must lead to prohibition, the reverse need not  be true. On the other hand, prohibition is intended to authoritatively  forbid or restrain the act of ragging with the intention of stopping the  menace. The subtle difference lies in the fact that while prohibition of  ragging is a top-down approach where the law can be cryptic, any law on  prevention must be more participative with a bottom-up approach laying  down the detailed mechanism of preventive measures and  instrumentalities. A law which is prohibitive emphasizes on the  consequences of violating the prohibition and therefore builds on the  procedures and instrumentalities of punishment; a law which is preventive  in comparison would provide for the procedures and instrumentalities of  strengthening prevention of the offence. For our broad purposes of  weeding out the menace of ragging, any law must contain elements of both  prevention and prohibition.  3.16 The Committee notes with concern that firstly there are very few States  that have enacted laws in respect of ragging. Even these few existing State  laws are woefully lacking in provisions intended to prevent ragging. The  general scheme of the existing State laws casts a duty on the Head of  Institution to prohibit ragging. The Head is not to be a mute spectator and  has to conduct and enquiry on receipt of any complaint received and takes  action thereon. Whoever commits, participates in, abets or propagates  ragging shall be fined and or if convicted, punished with the prescribed  period of imprisonment, and is also liable for suspension if prima facie the  charge is found to be true. None of the State laws provide for any scheme  of prevention of ragging. Yes, the Committee has been told at almost all  places visited by it that detailed instructions have been issued by the  authorities and that ordinances of Universities provide for certain  mechanisms for prevention of ragging. However, in the absence of any  statutory provision in this regard it is easy to imagine that there is hardly  any compulsion on authorities or institutions to take preventive measures.  Yes, again, Supreme Court guidelines are stated to be followed by States  and institutions; however, no State law has been modified or amended to  bring them in line with the guidelines and directions of the Apex Court.  Even the law of Chhattisgarh does not really address the concern of  prevention. Indeed, it is too cryptic to attempt that aspect. This perhaps  confirms the reason as to why there have been nearly 200 reported  incidents of ragging since the time the Apex Court took up the matter and  there has been no abatement of the menace despite the introduction of  State laws. A list of incidents of ragging reported in the print media since  the year 1998 is at Annexure IX. The Committee thanks CURE for  making available this compilation. An analysis of this compilation for  state-wise reports of incidents is at Annexure IXA.  3.17 In order to be effective, statutory provisions have to be followed up with  appropriate delegated legislations or Rules, which empower the  instrumentalities of the State or institutional authorities to enforce the  laws. The Committee is did not come across notification of Rules or  Regulations in many of the State Acts. While some States dealt with the  problem of ragging in their State Education Acts (e.g. Karnataka  Education Act, 1995 wherein section 2(29) defined ragging ) dedicated  State laws in respect of ragging have been enacted between 1997 (Tamil  Nadu and Andhra Pradesh) and 2001 (Chhattigarh). The Apex Court  verdict in ‘Vishwa Jagriti Mission’ was delivered in the year 2001, wherein  certain “illustrative” guidelines had been set out for the various stake  holders.  3.18 The Apex Court laid down in the ‘Vishwa Jagriti Mission’ matter certain  guidelines for initiating an anti-ragging movement, for disseminating  information to students regarding ragging, taking an undertaking from  parents of students against the latter indulging in ragging, possible system  of interaction with ‘freshers’, formation of proctorial committee in each  institution to keep vigil in all vulnerable locations, and to promptly deal  with incidents of ragging. The guidelines also included fixing of liability on  the management, the principal/Head of the Institution and others  responsible for maintaining discipline such as the hostel wardens/  superintendents. The substance of the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme  Court’s guidelines could be summarized as below :   The guidelines issued by the Court being only illustrative,  institutions and authorities could take further necessary steps to  curb ragging.   Local laws, if any, should be implemented and information  about such laws should be disseminated.   Cognizable offences of ragging should be reported to the police.   Police entry into campuses should be only at the instance of the  head of the institution.   Police should, while dealing with students, not treat them as  criminals, and should only resort to correctional action.   The UGC was asked to bring the guidelines to the notice of all  educational institutions – both the UGC and the Central  Government were asked to give wide publicity to the guidelines.  3.19 Ironically, the Committee notes that the reported incidents of ragging  have, far from abating, actually increased in the years since 2001. The  different State laws define ragging more or less in the same tone. As a  matter of fact, the definition of ragging is common to the Acts of Tamil  Nadu, Maharashtra and West Bengal. They do take care of the  psychological aspect of the trauma, yet do not comprehensively cover –  save for the definition in the Chhattisgarh Act, perhaps being a later piece  of legislation – the broader implication of ragging, which the Apex Court  itself set out in the ‘Vishwa Jagriti Mission’ matter as :  “Any disorderly conduct whether by words spoken or written or by an act  which has the effect of teasing, treating or handling with rudeness any other  student, indulging in rowdy or undisciplined activities which causes or is likely  to cause annoyance, hardship or psychological harm or to raise fear or  apprehension thereof in a fresher or a junior student or asking the students to  do any act or perform something which such student will not in the ordinary  course and which has the effect of causing or generating a sense of shame or  embarrassment so as to adversely affect the physique or psyche of a fresher or a  junior student.”  3.20 We shall discuss, elsewhere, the possible need for an even more  comprehensive definition of ragging; for the present however, what is  significant is that the definition of ragging in different State laws has not  undergone any revision since the matter was decided and certain  directions were given by the Apex Court in 2001.  3.21 As mentioned earlier, the Committee analyzed 198 incidents of ragging  between the years 1998 and 2007 (till date), from the compilation  forwarded by CURE (Annexure IXA). The purpose was to see whether  enactment of State laws since 1997 had been effective in curbing the  menace and incidence of ragging. Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh were  among the first States to enact a dedicated legislation way back in 1997 to  prohibit ragging. Surprisingly Andhra Pradesh happens to have the largest  number of reported incidents of ragging (23) during the period under  review. One reason for the higher reported incidents of ragging may be the  greater awareness brought about by a law and the consequent exposure to  even isolated instances being highlighted by the media or reported by the  victims or others. Another reason perhaps could be the expansion in  professional education where such incidents are known to be high. It is  equally interesting to note that while the State of Uttar Pradesh does not  have a State law against ragging, it has reported almost as many incidents  of ragging (22) as Andhra Pradesh during the same period. West Bengal is  yet another State with a State law (enacted in 2000) against ragging, yet  the third highest incidents of ragging (16) are reported from that State.  Maharashtra enacted a State law in the year 1999 and Kerala did so in  1998; both States recorded 14 incidents each – the fourth highest among  all States! The reported incidents of ragging have shown a sharp increase  in 2001 when as many as 31 incidents were reported as against a  maximum of 9 in the earlier years of the review period. There is no  discernible trend, although a peak seems to have been reached in the year  2005, when as many as 42 incidents were reported by the media.  3.22 How deplorable the consequences of ragging have become in recent years  can be gauged from news incidents of ragging reported by the media  (collated by CURE) – just to cite news items highlighted by the media in  2006 alone (of course it is possible that several other incidents not coming  to the attention of the media have not been reported or again that the  reports appearing in the vernacular sections of the press have not been  reflected here).  3.23 Engineering student S.P.Manoj is reported to have hanged  himself in Hyderabad, according to his parents, after ragging;  Bijoy Maharathi, a pharmacy student of Bhubaneswar died of  torture while undergoing ragging; a student of the Orissa  University of Agriculture Technology was pushed down from  the terrace by seniors resulting in spinal injuries and broken  legs; Vipin Lal of Kozhikode, a student of Teachers’ Training  Institute was severely manhandled and forced to consume  alcohol; in Bhagalpur, an altercation over ragging is reported  to have led to bomb-blasts; a college student in Indore jumped  in front of a running train after he was caught and detained  for ragging other students; Rohit Vijay Rane of Mumbai  suffered severe swelling of chest and skull injuries after being  hit by belts; Mukesh of Andhra Pradesh was sexually assaulted  during ragging and his mother could not bear the ignominy  leading to her suicide; a first year medical student of Pune had  to be hospitalized in the Intensive Care Unit after being ragged  severely by seniors; in Hyderabad, three students were  paraded naked and to add to the humiliation, the entire  episode was recorded through cell-phone camera; A Naga  medical student was found hanging in his hostel room at his  institute in Imphal after he had been ragged; Swapnil Sharma  of NIT, Durgapur was traumatized after being forced to kneel  down for two hours; ragging at Patna Science College had to  be controlled by security guards of the Proctor by opening fire;  two senior students of the Institute of Hotel Management at  Hyderabad were reportedly killed in retaliation by a junior  who had been subjected to ragging humiliation; stripping and  branding of junior students has been reported from Gujarat  Vidyapeeth, ironically, an institution founded on Mahatma  Gandhi’s call; girl students of Viswa Bharati at Santiniketan  allegedly forced a junior to undergo group sex. The menace of  ragging, it may be seen from the above account permeates our  campuses of every kind and not just the medical or  professional colleges (even though incidence is more prevalent  in such institutions) as is made out to be. It is also not confined  to tertiary education alone – what is shocking is that ragging  incidents have been reported of late in schools as well : during  2006 alone, three such incidents at the school level have been  reported. In Dehradun’s Shigally Hill International Academy,  a class VI student has alleged sexual harassment by seniors; a  class VIII student of Vadodara’s Bhavan VM Public School,  reportedly complained of ragging and left the institution;  reports of ragging cruelty has been reported by one Deepak  Sharma, who claims to have suffered during his days at Delhi  Public School, RK Puram. The humiliation felt by victims of  ragging leading to suicides is a painful reality – three such  cases were reported in 2005, two were reported in 2004, three  cases were reported in 2003, one in 2002, one in 2001, one in  2000 and one in 1998. Some of the elite institutions were not  far behind in despicable and inhuman acts of ragging, if  parents and students preferring to remain anonymous are to  be believed. The Committee was informed that in July-August,  2003, in IIT, Delhi over a hundred ‘freshers’ were stripped  naked and paraded through the corridors of its ‘Kumaon’  Hostel.  3.24 From the foregoing, it may be safely concluded that the situation in regard to ragging in educational institutions has only worsened both in terms of the incidence of the menace as well as in terms of the intensity or degree of brutality associated with it. And, it is not supported by evidence that the menace is confined to engineering or medical colleges alone. Inputs during the interactions of the Committee indicate that, not withstanding the counsel of the Hon’ble Apex Court, serious acts of a criminal nature continue to be perpetrated on victims of ragging by the oppressor seniors.  3.25 Is it the case that the guidelines of the Supreme Court were ineffective to  deal with the situation? If so, what could be the reasons? Is it that some of  them are impractical? Or, is it merely the case that the guidelines have not  been adequately publicized? Is it that the institutions have not taken the  problem to be serious enough? Is it that the problem being seasonal at the  time of admissions petering out later in the academic session, does not last  in the institutional memory? Is it that the moral edge in educational  administration has extinguished so much that no one has the courage to  bring about order in campuses? Is it the failure to co-opt all the stake  holders? Is it the unwillingness or neglect of governments to implement  the guidelines? Have any instances of non-compliance been brought to the  notice of the UGC/Central/State governments? These and other related  queries were addressed by the Committee in the various interaction  sessions with stake-holders. This situation also calls for an examination of  whether the view taken by the Apex Court that students indulging in  ragging should be treated as students for correctional steps and not as  criminals, needs to be looked at all over again.  4. Observations of the Committee  4.01 The Committee came across a variety of aspects of the menace of ragging which for the purpose of convenience can be grouped as under with appropriate illustrations:  4.01.1 ragging has several aspects with among others psychological,  social, political, economic, cultural, and academic dimensions.  4.01.2 Any act that prevents, disrupts or disturbs the regular academic activity of a student should be considered with in the academics related aspect of ragging; similarly, exploiting the services of a junior student for completing the academic tasks assigned to an individual or a group of seniors is also an aspect of academics related ragging prevalent in many institutions, particularly in the professional institutions in medicine.  4.01.3 Any act of financial extortion or forceful expenditure burden put on a junior student by senior students should be considered an aspect of ragging for ragging economic dimensions.  4.01.4 Any act of physical abuse including all variants of it : sexual abuse, homosexual assaults, stripping, forcing obscene and lewd acts, gestures, causing bodily harm or any other danger to health or person can be put in the category of ragging with criminal dimensions.  4.01.5 Any act or abuse by spoken words, emails, snail-mails, public insults should be considered with in the psychological aspects of ragging. This aspect would also include deriving perverted pleasure, vicarious or sadistic thrill from actively or passively participating in the discomfiture to others; the absence of preparing ‘freshers’ in the run up to their admission to higher education and life in hostels also can be ascribed as a psychological aspect of ragging – coping skills in interaction with seniors or strangers can be imparted by parents as well. Any act that affects the mental health and self confidence of students also can be described in terms of the  psychological aspect of ragging.  4.01.6 The political aspect of ragging is apparent from the fact that incidents of ragging are low in institutions which promote democratic participation of students in representation and provide an identity to students to participate in governance and decision making within the institute bodies.  4.01.7 The human rights perspective of ragging involves the injury caused to the fundamental right to human dignity through humiliation heaped on junior students by seniors; often resulting in the extreme step of suicide by the victims. In one instance we have already recounted the reported case of the mother of the victim committing suicide as she could not bear the ignominy of sexual assault on her son by his seniors.  4.02 In none of the interactions did the Committee come across any instance of the educational institutions approaching the police authorities in reporting even the extreme incidents of ragging. Usually, the complaints with the police are lodged by the parents of the victims. Most of the parents have reported that the University/college support for following up on the case with the law and order machinery has been lukewarm – indeed in some cases the institutions have actively dissuaded persistent parents. The Committee is concerned with the evasive attitude of institutions and it is therefore necessary that the institutional authorities are made accountable in a variety of ways.  4.03 The Committee views the absence of civil society initiatives on the issue of ragging as a matter of serious concern. Unless the wider society gets involved in the issue of ragging as a social menace, the problem cannot be curbed or prevented by educational institutions alone. Societal indifference is understandable in the perspective of the low access to higher education in India – with less than 9 out of every 100 of our young persons in the relevant age group (18-23 years) enrolled in higher education and only a fraction of even this low numbers in professional education or residing in campus hostels – the problem looks too remote or exclusive for the rest of the society. The Committee observed that it could come across not more than two or three NGOs engaged in creating  awareness against ragging or involved in any significant manner in the movement against ragging.  4.04 The expansion in capacity in educational institutions in the recent past, particularly in professional courses like engineering, has led to the mushrooming of out of campus hostel accommodation for a large number of students. These locations are often unknown to the institutional authorities or even to the local law and order authorities. The Committee was apprised of several incidents of ragging taking place in such locations. However, no one with in the institution was willing to own up responsibility as these private hostels were considered outside the campus and therefore outside the scope of responsibility cast on authorities by the guidelines of the Hon’ble Supreme Court. This indeed is a wrong assumption because the responsibility of the authorities is no less when ‘freshers’ are affected outside the campus, the mere fact that such incidents do not occur within the campus does not absolve them of the important responsibility cast on them by the Apex Court, for as long as the incident of ragging relates to the students enrolled in their institution.  4.05 The Committee came across instances where access to communication facilities – particularly of mobile phones – has saved junior students from imminent danger. It was observed that the possession of mobile phone was the best and immediate source for the ragged to communicate with the relevant authorities. The ban on the use of mobile phones in some institutions on the ground that they are liable to be misused is somewhat far-fetched. It may be so in the case of some devices which are fitted with photographic facility, but certainly not so as a purely communication device. The ban on mobile phones is also imposed on the grounds that they disturb classes – this can be easily overcome by banning use in class rooms, or through technological solutions, through jamming for example.  4.06 The Committee observed that among the instances of ragging very few could be reported even where the junior students were courageous to do so. The reason is to be found in their inability to identify senior students indulging in ragging. How effective can timely complaints by any emboldened fresher be is highlighted by the reported case of a girl student of the Medical College at Kottayam in Kerala, whose complaint against male seniors resorting to sexual assault while ragging, led to their arrests  and prosecution as well as action against the college authorities. The resultant media attention raised public interest in favour of stern action. It was also observed that outsiders (non bonafide students, the backloggers /drag-ons and local goons) would invariably enter the premises of institutions and acquire the role of ‘raggers’. It was also pointed out to the Committee that such elements enjoy patronage of the influential elite. It was also pointed out to the Committee by institutional authorities that they are at times prevented from taking strong action against the culprits by outside elements of the society enjoying political support.  4.07 The Committee was told by all the stake holders that there is pressing need to provide assistance and to make available guidance to fresher students by professional counsellors at the time of their admission in order to prepare them for the life ahead in hostels. Professional Counsellors should be engaged to counsel potential raggers also, who should be identified by the institutional authorities, teaching faculty and non-teaching employees.  4.08 The Committee observes that almost all the stake-holders have failed to act in some way or the other in curbing the menace of ragging in every State. The State Governments have not monitored if the ragging in their State has been curbed or not. The authorities of the institution have not played a pro-active role which was very necessary in terms of the guidelines of the Apex Court where primary responsibility was cast on the institutional authorities. On the contrary it was told to the Committee that the authorities dissuaded the victims of ragging from making any complaint.  4.09 It was categorically brought to the notice of the committee that in remote areas, wards of influential families involved in politics, local administration, trade and commerce, land-owning classes and other power elite indulged in most shameful acts of ragging and got away scot free. The Committee was told that stake holders cutting across sections  institutional authorities, faculty, senior students, the management, the civil authority, non-teaching staff etc. – can curb or prevent ragging through a concerted effort. The Committee was also told that even as it should be a collective responsibility, a major share of such responsibility should rest on the head of the institution. The committee also observed that the authorities of the State and the Central Governments responsible  for implementing and monitoring the anti-ragging provisions had not done their job satisfactorily.  4.10 The Committee considers that the pedagogical and academic environment in campuses did not encourage activities wherein the students can engage themselves in intellectual, social and physically and culturally meaningful pursuits. On the basis of the inputs received at the various hearings, it was observed that in most of the cases ragging took place as a result of not engaging students in classes; long interval between successive classes; lack of co-curricular or sports and other extra-curricular activities; lack of strict implementation of attendance rules for senior students; and lack of monitoring of the atmosphere and the environment at eating ‘joints’ (canteens, cafes, Khoka, etc). In short, it proves the dictum  an ‘idle mind is the devil’s workshop’. The reason for this state of affairs has to be found partly in the declining allocation of financial resources to colleges and universities over the years resulting in the near absence of scheduled extra-curricular and co-curricular activities. Several intra-collegiate, inter collegiate, intra-university and inter-university sports and other competitions have well nigh disappeared. Academic activities have also over the years ceased to be as exacting and challenging to sustain student interest, leaving them with leisurely hours to engage in undesirable activities.  4.11 It was brought to the notice of the Committee that it is almost impossible for a fresh student to lodge a complaint against a ‘ragger’ with the appropriate authorities. We were told that insurmountable pressure of nefarious kinds is put on those who are ragged and on their kith and kin. Worst is the plight of the hostel residents who can not seek protection from any quarter. It was the considered opinion of almost all the stake holders that the Committee should devise ways and means in order to maintain the anonymity of the ‘ragged’ so that appropriate and drastic action should be taken against the ragger, without risking the identity of the victim.  4.12 The Committee observed, and was also told at many places, that very often members of the teaching faculty were reluctant to be posted as wardens in hostels. It is not too difficult to imagine that warden is the pivot in the residential system of campuses and from the point of view of proximity, if  available, the warden is the first accessible authority for a student in distress. Therefore the demands of the job of a warden are neither purely academic nor one of effective watch and ward alone. The job requires a combination of skills and qualifications as well as experience – communication skills, counselling tactics, and ability to empathize and understand student psychology, firmness and tact in dealing with errant and deviant seniors, and so on. While many members of the faculty may fit the bill, it is also unreasonable to expect the already overworked faculty members to be saddled with the additional taxing burden of being a warden as well.  4.13 It was unanimously brought to the notice of the Committee that drastic measures were required to curb the menace of ragging. It was also proposed before the Committee that a centralized comprehensive anti ragging Act may be prepared with provision for exemplary punishment or in the alternative, the Indian Penal Code (IPC) may be amended appropriately to provide for ragging as an offence so that the Hon’ble Apex court’s concern for ‘ragging free campuses’ can be realized.  4.14 It was brought to the notice of the Committee that guidelines of the Hon’ble Supreme Court have been ignored by various institutions and other concerned authorities. Given below are the observations of the Committee specifically in respect of the guidelines of the Apex Court :  4.14.1 The Apex Court had prescribed that education institutions should generate an “atmosphere of discipline by sending a clear message that no act of ragging shall be tolerated and any act of ragging shall not go unnoticed or unpunished”. The continuation of ragging in various forms sometimes in the garb of ‘mild ragging’, ‘introductions’ etc. in the opinion of this Committee is equally deplorable and often such ‘surrogate’ ragging practices are patronized by institutional authorities themselves. This is established by the fact that ‘social interaction’ sessions or ‘freshers’’ ‘welcome’ parties are traditionally organized only after sufficient time is available to seniors to rag ‘freshers’ – often months after the date of admission.  4.14.2 The Apex Court had asked that punishments prescribed for ragging be set out in the prospectus and other documents of institutions so as to  get disseminated among students and all concerned. While some institutions did adduce evidence of complying with this guideline, in several cases it was pointed out to the Committee that such information is either mentioned scantily or not mentioned at all.  4.14.3 Similarly, there is a provision in the guidelines for taking an undertaking from the parents of students, accepting the prescribed punishment that would accrue to their erring wards. It was brought to the notice of the Committee that according to a survey conducted by SPACE, very few institutions adhered to this condition. This was further confirmed during the Committee’s interactions at its meetings.  4.14.4 The prescription from the Apex Court for preparing publicity material regarding anti-ragging measures and facilitating information for ‘freshers’ on whom to contact for help, is also not widely followed.  4.14.5 The Supreme Court’s guidelines mention about the need to interact with ‘freshers’ on the part of teachers and Heads of institutions and other authorities to instill a sense of protection. The Committee observes that it is difficult, if not impossible, for ‘freshers’ to gain access to the institutional authorities in strict confidence and without risking their identity being exposed. Several instances of teachers, instead of being sympathetic to the condition of the ‘freshers’, were reported to be eulogizing the merits of undergoing ragging without a murmur – often comparing about the virtues of ragging from the times that they themselves had been ragged as students! The Committee feels that such teachers and other authorities can hardly be expected to be protectors of the victims of ragging.  4.14.6 The Apex Court had also laid down in the guidelines that there should be a Proctorial Committee consisting of senior faculty members, wardens etc. for taking timely action and to maintain constant vigil on incidents of ragging. The Committee was told that most institutions have formed some type of committee or the other to deal with issues of ragging – however, in the absence of any monitoring being done at the level of the District/ University/State or at the Centre, it is difficult to appreciate the efficacy and reflexes of such committees at the level of the institution.  4.14.7 The guidelines of the Apex Court also mention action against erring institutions and the authorities within institutions for lapses in failing to curb or prevent ragging. Not one instance of any action being taken against any institution or authorities within institutions has been reported to the Committee in respect of any of the incidents of ragging enumerated in the Annexure to this Report.  4.14.8 The Apex Court has also emphasized on the need to provide adequate and effective security to the place of accommodation of ‘freshers’ and regulated entry as well as prohibition of the entry of seniors after specified hours to such accommodation. The Committee came across numerous instances of accommodation being shared within the same premises by seniors and ‘freshers’. One of the constraints that was pointed out by institutions was the lack of financial resources to redesign or provide separate accommodation and also to pay for security personnel for being deployed in adequate numbers.  4.14.9 One of the guidelines is to impose collective fines where those committing or abetting ragging can not be identified so that there is a message of deterrence to potential ‘raggers’. The Committee could not, barring one or two isolated instances, come across instances of imposition of collective punishment.  4.14.10 The Supreme Court had prescribed that migration certificate of students should mention whether any punishment had been meted out for ragging. Not many institutions or universities follow this, as reported to the Committee.  4.14.11 The guidelines had recommended interaction sessions at frequent intervals between ‘freshers’ and their seniors so as to build confidence among the two groups and also to serve as opportunities to show-case talent. The Committee came across the unique model being followed in the Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur where student counselors are assigned the responsibility of guiding ‘freshers’ allocated to their charge. Several colleges of engineering and medicine also reported to the Committee similar practices; however what is obviously a highly desirable practice is not very widely practised.  4.14.12 One of the other observations of the Supreme Court is that its guidelines are only illustrative and are not intended to come in the way of the institutions and authorities devising ways and means to curb the menace of ragging. The Committee gathers the impression that by calling the guidelines as illustrative, the Apex Court had merely underscored the need for more such steps to be taken by all concerned. Obviously, because no exhaustive list of measures to be taken in order to prevent ragging was possible to be laid down in an Order, implicit in the Supreme Court’s prescription was the suggestion that each institution and all concerned should strive towards more innovative measures. The guidelines were a broad indicator of the directions that such an effort ought to take. The Committee feels that the guidelines are mandatory on all institutions, the UGC and other bodies as well as the State and Central Governments; and are to be followed without exception, being clearly not in the nature of an optional policy that may or may not be followed at the discretion of all these stake-holders.  4.14.13 Finally, the guidelines also state that unmanageable instances of ragging or that which amounts to cognizable offence may be reported to the police which should take a correctional attitude and not one of dealing with students as criminals. Indeed, the observation of the Court is that the authority of the teacher vis a vis students must be restored. It has been reported to the Committee that hardly any instance of ragging is reported to the police, and even where grave incidents resulting in deaths take place, invariably the institutions try to rationalize the episode or are reluctant to attribute the same to incidents of ragging for the fear that the “reputation” of the institution is not sullied.  4.15 A large number of representations and suggestions received by the Committee have drawn our attention that unless the law-enforcement authorities are closely associated with the internal mechanism in each institution, it would be difficult to contain the more and more aggressive forms of ragging that are emerging. It was also repeatedly brought to the notice of the Committee that the forms of ragging listed by the UGC Committee in 1999 have become ‘outmoded’ or ‘dated’ because extremely vulgar, most inhuman and unprintable forms of ragging are being resorted to these days. In one of the extreme suggestions received from Kerala (from one Shri TVK Warrier of Palakkad), it was contended that police  officers should be posted as wardens! The anguish at the deteriorating situation is understandable because it was pointed out that ragging has now assumed perverse forms – physical assaults, wrongful confinement, use of criminal force, threats, intimidation and denial of basic human rights. It was suggested to the Committee that the recommendations of the UGC Committee with regard to punishments or preventive measures have not been implemented and have remained only on paper – that college functionaries consider ragging as a non-academic issue and therefore did not get involved either due to indifference or due to a lack of commitment. It was recommended on behalf of the Kerala Private College Managements Association that the Head of the College or University Department should be “bound by law to take action for criminal offence against the students” who rag. It was pointed out that Heads of institutions are reluctant to act “fearing the politically based student organizations”, because “often the miscreants are supported by one or the other student organizations”. Several parents have suggested that Wardens and Heads of Institutions should be held accountable for their failure to control unruly behaviour on the part of students.  4.16 It was also reported to the Committee, through several emails, that involvement of parents in educational institutions contributed to reducing the incidents of ragging. This could be in many ways – regular Parent Teacher Association meetings, continuous communication with parents regarding the performance and attendance as well as conduct of their wards, representation of parents in the anti-ragging committees, permitting parents of ‘freshers’ easy and convenient access to the campus and hostel facilities till their wards settle down in the initial months and so on.  4.17 The Committee looked at the possible rationale for amending the Indian Penal Code in order to provide for the offence of Ragging and punishment thereof. According to section 40 of the Indian Penal Code, subject to exceptions set out in clauses 2 and 3 of that section, the word “offence” denotes a thing made punishable under that Code. Considering that the senior school leaving age is 18 years, both the ‘freshers’ and the senior students ragging them are adults. From the various accounts of how ragging takes place, what leads to ragging, the intention of those who commit ragging, the trauma suffered by its victims, the desirability of its  prevention etc., the Committee is satisfied that ragging fits the description of an offence with a multiplicity of ingredients each of which constitutes an offence punishable under the existing provisions of the Indian Penal Code, and none of these offences can escape penalties on grounds of being General Exceptions under Chapter IV of the Code. To elaborate, whosoever abets the punishable ingredient offences of ragging attracts the provisions (Section 107 onwards) under Chapter V; senior students conspiring to commit the offences attract the provisions (Section 120A and 120B) of Chapter VA; incidents of ragging leading to unlawful assembly or rioting and promoting enmity vis a vis ‘freshers’ or hiring outside elements for the purpose of rioting or unlawful assembly clearly attract Chapter VIII (Sections 141 onwards); parading ‘freshers’ in the nude or making them sing obscene songs or act lewdly are offences that are a public nuisance, affect decency and morals covered under Chapter XIV; several of the reported incidents of ragging already mentioned earlier in this Report are directly attributable to offences affecting the human body under Chapter XVI of the Code, varying as can be discerned from offences causing hurt, wrongful restraint, wrongful confinement, use of criminal force, assault as well as sexual offences or even unnatural offences; similarly, extortion from ‘freshers’ or mischief by seniors committed after preparation is made for causing hurt of the ‘freshers’, criminal trespass by senior students, in to the wing of the hostel or rooms where entry of seniors is barred, with the intention to cause hurt or intimidate the ‘freshers’ would attract Chapter XVII dealing with offences against property; criminal intimidation of juniors by the seniors during the act of ragging attracts the provisions of Chapter XXII of the Code; and lastly, Section 511 in Chapter XXIII is attracted in all cases of attempts to commit the offences punishable with imprisonment under the Code.  4.18 In the light of the above, the Committee looked at the definition of ragging as suggested by the different stake holders and also the definition in the different State laws as well as the definition referred to by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the Vishwa Jagriti matter. While the dictionary meaning of the word “ragging” identifies it with the acts of teasing, taunting, playing a practical joke upon someone or holding comic parades or an act/ behavior that causes harm/embarrassment to a student and other activities during certain period of a college term, in the light of the incidents reported all over the country, such a meaning does not fully or  adequately reflect the transformed face of ragging as practised at present. The Apex Court in the Vishwa Jagriti Mission matter observed that broadly speaking, ragging is any disorderly conduct whether by words spoken or written or by an act which the effect of teasing, treating or handling with rudeness any other student, indulging in rowdy or in disciplined activities which causes or is likely to cause annoyance, hardship or psychological harm or to raise fear or apprehension thereof in a ‘fresher’or a junior student or asking the students to do any act or perform something which such student will not do in the ordinary course and which has the effect of causing or generating a sense of shame or embarrassment so as to adversely affect the physique or psyche of a ‘fresher’ or a junior student. The cause of indulging in ragging is deriving a sadistic pleasure or showing off power, authority or superiority by the seniors over their juniors or ‘‘freshers’’.  4.19 Literature on ragging would indicate that ‘hazing’ is often a ritualistic test, which may constitute harassment, abuse or humiliation with requirements to perform meaningless tasks, sometimes as a way of initiation into a social group. The definition can refer to either physical (sometimes violent) or mental (possibly degrading) practices. The word is most frequently encountered in the United States and Canada; in the British Commonwealth ragging or fagging is usually used instead. Hazing is often used as a method to promote group loyalty and camaraderie through shared suffering (male bonding in fraternities), either with fellow participants, past participants or both. According to a mention found in the Wikipedia ragging is a term used for active, systematic human rights abuse, similar to hazing and fagging, the severest forms of which are found in engineering, medical and military colleges. CURE suggested to the Committee an alternative definition, according to which ragging is an act of aggression committed by an individual or a group of individuals over another individual or a group of individuals where the former, by virtue of their being senior to the latter, somehow gets the authority and audacity to commit the act and the latter, by virtue of their being new to the institution, are automatic victims. SPACE also offered the Committee an alternative definition – as mentioned earlier, it was suggested to us that the Apex Court’s definition did not cover all aspects of ragging – according to SPACE, ragging is a systemized form of human rights abuse in educational institutions in South Asia, the worst forms of which are found  in engineering, medical and military colleges. It is committed by ‘senior’ students (those in second year or higher) upon ‘‘‘freshers’’’ or first-year students. The forms and traditions of ragging may vary from one place to another, but the greatest common factor in ragging in any educational institution is the creation of an environment of constant fear and intimidation of ‘‘freshers’’, wherein even the air they breathe becomes ‘Kafkaesque’; every bit of matter around them is their enemy.  4.20 The Committee studied the various State laws. The Maharashtra Prohibition of Ragging Act, 1999 defines ragging as display or disorderly conduct, doing of any act which causes or is likely to cause physical or psychological harm or raise apprehension or fear or shame or embarrassment to a student in any educational institution. The Kerala Prohibition of Ragging Act 1998 defines ragging as teasing, abusing or causing hurt or asking student to do an act which he is unwilling to do. The State law in Andhra Pradesh defines ragging as doing an act, which causes or is likely to cause insult or annoyance or fear or apprehension or threat or intimidation or outrage modesty or insult to a student. According to the Tamil Nadu Prohibition of Ragging Act 1997, ragging means display of noisy, disorderly conduct, doing any act, which causes or is likely to cause physical or psychological harm or raise apprehension or fear or shame or embarrassment to a student in any educational institution and includes teasing, abusing of, playing practical jokes on or causing hurt to, such students; or asking the student to do any act or perform something, which such student will not, in the ordinary course, willingly do. The West Bengal Prohibition of Ragging in Educational Institutions Act, 2000 defines ragging means doing of any act, which causes or is likely to cause, any physical, psychological or physiological harm or apprehension or shame or embarrassment to a student and includes teasing or abusing of, playing practical jokes on, or causing hurt to, any student, or asking any student to do any act, or perform anything, which he would not, in the ordinary course, be willing to do or perform. According to the Assam Prohibition of Ragging Bill, 1998, ragging means either display of noisy or disorderly conduct or doing of any act which causes or is likely to cause social, physical or psychological harm or raise apprehension or fear or shame or embarrassment to any student in any educational institution and includes teasing, abusing of, playing practical jokes on or causing hurt to, such students; or asking the student to do any act or perform something  which such student will not, in the ordinary course, willingly do. According to a Private Member Bill introduced in the Goa Legislature called the Goa Prohibition of Ragging Bill, 2006, ragging means display of disorderly conduct, doing any act, which causes or is likely to cause physical or psychological harm or raise apprehension or fear or shame or embarrassment to a student in any educational institution and includes teasing, abusing , threatening or playing practical jokes on, or causing hurt to, such students; or asking a student to do any act or perform something, which such student will not, in the ordinary course, willingly do. The Chhattisgarh Shaikshanik Sansthaon Me Pratarna Ka Pratishedh Adhiniyam, 2001, defines ragging as causing, inducing, compelling or forcing a student, whether by way of a practical joke or otherwise, to do any act which detracts from human dignity or violates his person or exposes him to ridicule or forbear from doing any unlawful act, by intimidating, wrongfully restraining, wrongfully confining, or injuring him or by using criminal force to him or by holding out to him any threat or such intimidation, wrongful restraint, wrongful confinement, injury or the use of criminal force.  4.21 The Committee observes that while all the State laws recognize the physical, physiological or psychological consequences of ragging, a comparatively more exhaustive definition is to be found in the Chhattisgarh Act which expressly acknowledges the reality that ragging has transformed from mere pranks or practical jokes or causing of annoyance to junior students by the seniors to the extremely serious criminality of a range of possible offences. What is missing from the State laws is the sexual dimension of ragging which is being resorted to more recently.  4.22 As mentioned in the Chapter on the Methodology, the Committee felt it  would be necessary to understand the psychology of students who fall  victims to ragging as well as of those who have a propensity to rag. The  summary results of the survey that we conducted across students of  universities and colleges through a questionnaire designed by Prof. Aruna  Broota is Annexure IV. The response to the first question on the  significance attached to the first few days in college as a fresher indicates  that more than half of the sample considers it to be a positive experience.  This could be inferred from the wide variety of responses – some called it  an opportunity to explore the unknown, making new friends, an  experience far different from the school days, exciting change and similar  other adjectives have been used by respondents. One in every five  respondents has indicated a mixed feeling, neither too effusive in terms of  the significance attached to college life, nor any negative emotions.  However, as many as twenty eight percent of the responses have been  outright negative. Experiences range from loneliness, dullness, and a fear  of the unknown, to being overawed and living in anxiety about being  ragged and teased by seniors. It is interesting to note that while more than  half of the responses were positive when dealing with the question of early  life in the college, the question on the early days in the hostel brought out  only sixteen percent positive responses. The negative responses showed  consistency of results, however the mixed reactions show a steep increase  to fifty three percent. What can be said is that life in hostels is not all that  happy compared to life in the college in general, it could also be due to  home sickness or other reasons, but this is an interesting contrast. The  question on expectations from the new institution that they join has  brought forth an expected response with as many as sixty three percent  desiring good academic environment, good infrastructure and good  placement opportunities. The second highest number of respondents  (fifteen percent) worry about discipline and care in the new environment,  and eleven percent wish to be granted freedoms and do not desire any  controls or fines etc. As many as forty four percent of the respondents  expect their seniors to guide and help them in academic matters, the  second largest group of respondents (thirty seven percent) seek friendship  and affection from their seniors, while as many as ten percent want to  escape ragging and another three percent do not want anything from their  seniors. These are significant responses and desire for friendship and  affection or to escape ragging or to stay away from seniors, which together  account for as many as fifty percent or exactly half of the respondents,  points to an uncomfortable relationship or the desire to be on the right  side of the seniors. The power equation in the campuses is unmistakable.  4.23 While the Committee had to cull out the sense of responses to questions of  a qualitative nature by categorizing them in to broad aspects of  expectations and behaviour – and we may even be off the mark in our  assessment of the situation – in contrast, the responses to objective type  questions figuring in the questionnaire were more direct and therefore  could be more accurately inferred. When asked as to how they make new  friends, the strategy is through helping the strangers (thirty three percent)  and through an affable smiling approach (forty seven percent). As is to be  expected there are only a few extreme instances of making friends through  aggressive behaviour – four percent do so by teasing and one percent  through scaring off the strangers. These extreme cases, we suspect are the  potential ‘raggers’. When asked whether they took the lead in making  friends, an overwhelming seventy one percent responded as taking the  initiative in making new friends, only twenty three percent wait for the  other person to take the initiative. In the reaction to being subjected to  bullying, as is to be expected the largest number (forty six percent) of  respondents feel angry, and twenty eight percent feel insulted when  bullied. Strangely, as many as seventeen percent of students feel important  even though subjected to ragging – it is easy to see why we came across a  number of responses where ragging has been indicated to be an enjoyable  experience, as would be clear from the response to the statement “ I enjoy  being teased and bullied”, where nearly half of the respondents (forty eight  percent) say they enjoy the experience of being bullied while twenty two  percent say they would stay away from the institution if bullied, and six  percent are even willing to leave studies if subjected to being bullied or  teased. Another proposition was designed to test the attention seeking  tendencies among the respondents :“I like to be in the limelight, by hook  or by crook”. About half of the respondents (fifty two percent) are not  interested in seeking any attention to themselves, but a significant one  third of them would like to be in the limelight by adopting any means. This  is a dangerous portent among the youth. We may hasten to add that no  gender classification of responses has been done and that would remain a  limitation of the survey. The Questionnaire asked whether the respondents  would be happy to be friends with someone who hurts them. Even though  as many as fifty five percent gave an emphatic no to this suggestion, what  is significant is that two in every five respondents (forty one percent)  would not mind mending relationships even if they were hurt by someone.  This perhaps is that reason why incidents of ragging continue go  unreported and are self perpetuating, because those who do not mind  being hurt or bullied would naturally think little of bullying or hurting  others as relationships in their view do not get affected. Finally,  respondents were asked whether they thought there ought to be  procedures and guidelines as to how junior and senior students should  relate to each other in the first few days of college. It is heartening to note  that as many as an overwhelming seventy two percent want well described  procedures and guidelines to regulate relationship between junior and  senior students. The Committee referred the above interpretation of the  findings of the survey to Prof. (Dr.) Aruna Broota, who while endorsing the  conclusions, suggested several lines of action in follow up, which we have  incorporated appropriately in our recommendations.  4.24 In the light of the above observations, the Committee has ventured to  make its recommendations, which follow.  5. Recommendations  5.01 Based on its interactions and the elaborate methodology followed by it, the Committee is convinced that the society at large considers ragging as a definite menace. We are equally convinced that softer options have not worked and therefore it is time for tough measures. The Committee’s recommendations, in terms of actions necessary, fall in six levels, namely, schools, higher educational institutions, district administration, universities, State authorities and Central authorities. At each level, we recommend that the active involvement of media and the civil society is essential in tackling the problem of ragging.  5.02 At the School level, the Committee recommends that on the same lines as topics on environment education were introduced in the school curriculum, the National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) and the respective State Council of Educational Research and Training (SCERT), should devise methodologies and content for introducing Human Rights education of which awareness against ragging should be a compulsory part. Where inputs in Human Rights already exist, the same should be reviewed to ensure that awareness and exposure to the evil of ragging are highlighted in the syllabi. In the lower classes, respect for human rights, consciousness against violating others’ rights, and respect for privacy, diversity and equality should be discreetly grafted into the lessons and exercises right from the primary and elementary stages of schooling in order to inculcate the desirable value system from the formative years of every child.  5.03 At the secondary and senior secondary stages of schooling, every school should be required to arrange regular and periodic psychological counselling sessions for every student till the time he/she passes out from the school. Parents and teachers should also be involved in such sessions. Every year there should be a certain number of mandatory counselling sessions with experienced psychologists. The Committee was informed by experts that 20 counselling workshop/sessions were desirable each year. Since it may not be immediately possible to avail the services of a vast number of trained psychologists, it is recommended that the B.Ed. and Teacher training programmes should be mandated to provide for anti ragging and human-rights appreciation inputs so that every teacher is  equipped to provide at least the rudiments of the counselling approach.  5.04 What would be desirable is that the school leaving certificate and the character certificate categorically mentions the status of the student in terms of his/her behavioural pattern; which should be mandatory to be submitted at the time of admission at the institute of higher learning. This certificate should mention whether the student has displayed persistent violent or aggressive behaviour or any desire to harm others. It is recommended that each State should create a pool of professional counsellors at the level of the district, who visit each and every school in every state to fill the obligation stated above. The District Institutes of Educational Technology (DIETs) should be reoriented for the purpose.  5.05 The Committee endorses the view that bullying and corporal punishments at the school level legitimize ideas of power abuse, harassment, violation of dignity and privacy, and as such may prepare the ground for ragging at the college level. Bullying is a phenomenon in which the students tease and humiliate other students in various ways. Corporal punishment has been banned by some states viz. Goa, Delhi and Tamil Nadu. Therefore, teachers at the school level must be made conscious of this fact. The curriculum for B.Ed. and other teacher training courses, as well as in service training courses for the teachers, should include topics on sensitization against corporal punishment and checking of bullying amongst students.  5.06 At the level of the Higher educational institutions, it should be mandatory for the student at the time of admission to submit documentation in respect of (i) the school leaving certificate/character certificate which will include a report on behavioural pattern; (and, in due course include the report by a professional counsellor). The institution may thereupon keep intense watch upon a student who has a negative entry in this regard. (ii) an annual undertaking to be signed by each student, whether fresher or senior, and his/her parent(s) jointly stating that each of them have read the relevant instructions/regulations against ragging, as well as punishments, and that if the ward has been found guilty he/she will be proceeded against. The UGC Committee (1999) had also recommended so and the directions of the Apex Court also included this. While endorsing these recommendations, we emphasize specifically the following: First, we  strongly recommend that such an undertaking should be provided in English as well as in the vernacular (mother tongue of the parent); second, the undertaking should be furnished at the beginning of each academic year by every student; third, the undertaking should be obtained every year from each student admitted to the hostel; and finally, the undertaking should be appended to a brochure containing the guidelines and other relevant instructions in regard to ragging and consequences of indulging in ragging  so that there is no denial of the responsibility on the one hand, and there is also a clear understanding of the requirement by all concerned, including parents who may be otherwise deficient in their facility with the English language. Merely getting an undertaking signed from students and parents, without linking it with the information relevant to ragging in our opinion would be ineffective, and hence our modified recommendations.  5.07 We feel that it is extremely important that this requirement of a binding undertaking is complied with by all institutions, and some superior level bodies must cross-verify and vouch that there is strict compliance thereto. This has to be ensured by the affiliating university and also verified by bodies such as the National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC), the UGC Expert Committees, including those which visit institutions for recognition under section 2(f) and 12(B) of the UGC Act, AICTE’s Committees, and Committees of other statutory councils or authorities such as the Medical Council of India (MCI), the Dental Council of India (DCI), the Nursing Council of India (NCI) etc. At present these bodies appear to perceive ragging merely as a disciplinary issue in which the regulatory authorities have little or no role, and in the context of curbing the menace of ragging appropriate directions must be given defining their role and responsibility. Indeed, without the active involvement of the multitude of bodies and authorities, a continuous vigil cannot be maintained. We are constrained to remark that while ensuring a ragging-free environment in campuses has a direct bearing on the standards of higher education, none of the bodies responsible for coordinating/ establishing or maintaining standards of higher education (technical and medical etc. included) with whom we interacted, radiate the confidence that they consider the continuing practice of ragging as contributing to lowering of the standards.  5.08 The University Grants Commission and the statutory bodies such as the AICTE, MCI, DCI, NCI, ICAR as well as affiliating universities and Directorates of Higher, Technical, Agricultural and Medical etc. Education of State Governments, must make it mandatory and ensure that each institution compulsorily incorporates in the ‘prospectus’ and in other admission related documents, the earlier directions or any future directions of the Apex Court and/or of the Central or State Governments as applicable, so that candidates and their parents are sensitized in respect of the prohibition and consequences of ragging. Non-compliance with the directives against ragging in any manner whatsoever shall be considered as lowering of academic standards by the errant institution. The regulatory authorities must proceed against such errant institutions by imposing the prescribed penalties already provided under their respective statutes/regulations etc. which they would otherwise have exercised in matters of lowering of academic standards.  5.09 Just as there ought to be disincentives as mentioned in paragraph 5.08 above for failure to prevent ragging, there should be incentives to institutions for curbing it. By way of incentives, the Central Government, State Governments, University Grants Commission and other funding bodies such as the AICTE and the Indian Council of Agricultural Research etc. should provide special/additional annual financial grants-in-aid to those of the universities and colleges, which report a blemish-less record in terms of there being no incidents of ragging. These bodies should also institute another category of financial awards or incentives for colleges or universities which take stringent action against those responsible in respect of ragging incidents. This would overcome the present problem of institutions covering up incidents for fear of adverse impact on reputation.  5.10 The Committee notes that while there have been some isolated efforts at publicizing the concern and ban in respect of ragging, it could not come across any meaningful advertisement campaign through the various news media, either nationally or regionally, despite the 2001 direction of the Apex Court. This indicates a general apathy and a failure to sensitize society. The entire approach to ragging appears to be viewed as a seasonal issue, to be attended to only during the admission time and put on the back-burner after the heat and dust of admissions settle down. We recommend that there has to be a concerted effort on the part of Central  and State Governments as well as the universities in publicizing the ills of ragging and in sensitizing and building public opinion.  5.11 We have described the need to launch effective advertisement campaigns at the national and regional level – the Central Government through the Directorate of Audio Visual Publicity (DAVP) and the State Governments through their Directorates of Information or Public Relations have the primary responsibility in this regard. This apart, multi-pronged campaigns have to be launched and sustained by universities as well as the institutions, locally. Extensive publicity must be undertaken by the institution by means of creative posters, audio-visual aids, by holding counselling sessions, workshops, painting and design competitions among students and other methods as it deems fit. We came across a number of initiatives by institutions, one such effort forms the back cover of our report.  5.12 The Committee recommends that it is critical that institutions promote a sense of confidence among every student entering the portals of higher education. It is important that the natural anxiety among the ‘freshers’ is addressed by institutional authorities. We recommend that there should be a clear gap of one to two weeks between the date of joining of ‘freshers’ and the seniors, classes for the seniors should commence later. This would enable the ‘freshers’ to familiarize themselves with the campus environment and adjust to the sudden changeover from schools to higher education. In addition, this period would be critical in building and consolidating a definite sense of bonding among the ‘freshers’ who would be better equipped to deal with the seniors with confidence acquired during the interim. It must be ensured that senior students are not allowed to enter the campus, including the hostels, under any pretext. The only exception to this rule may be for a few senior students who have been appointed by the institutional authorities for assisting in the orientation programme. We recommend that it should be mandatory for institutions to inform parents of senior students to send their wards only on the due date and not earlier. This system is in practice in some institutions and the Committee recommends that this must be implemented in all institutions. We further recommend that every university – whether established by Central law or State law or declared by the Central Government as an institution deemed to be university – must compulsorily amend its  relevant Ordinances or bye-laws to ratify the schedule of the first two weeks described above as well as in the following paragraphs. We acknowledge that in some professional programmes – medicine and engineering in particular – there could be some practical difficulties in ensuring that senior students are not present on the campus when freshers join, however we feel that if the respective Councils make a sincere effort to adapt their academic calendar suitably this should not be such an insurmountable problem.  5.13 We further recommend that social events such as ‘welcome parties’ or ‘freshers’’ day celebrations in honour of ‘freshers’ is a sound tradition that needs to be encouraged by institutions. However, what is lamentable is that such events which often mark the ending of ragging and beginning of bonhomie among seniors and ‘freshers’, is scheduled only after a prolonged bout of ragging. Therefore, we recommend that in every institution, the ‘freshers’’ day or ‘ welcome party’ shall be concluded within the first two weeks of the beginning of the academic session, that is not later than one week after the commencement of classes for the seniors in the context of our recommendation in 5.12 above. In any such event, celebrating the ‘freshers’’ day or party, college faculty must be present and must ensure that no ragging or untoward incident takes place on the occasion.  5.14 We also recommend that every institution should engage or seek the assistance of professional counsellors at the time of admissions to counsel ‘freshers’ in order to prepare them for the life ahead, particularly for adjusting to the life in hostels. The Committee feels that preparing students in this manner would enable them to cope with the stresses of the hitherto unknown life in the campus.  5.15 The Committee recommends that each institution, and where required the affiliating university, should lay down a calendar of events and activities to facilitate and complement familiarization of juniors with the academic environment of the institution. This calendar must be automatically ratified under the relevant Ordinances of the affiliating university. There should be an introductory interaction with faculty members, members of the staff and senior students as was suggested by the UGC Committee (1999) as well. The breakup of the orientation programme should be as  follows: (i) the head of the institution must address all fresh students on the first day of the academic session, and the address must amongst other issues educate them about their rights against harassment of any kind including ragging; and all faculty members must invariably be present on the occasion; (ii) the second orientation programme for fresh students should be held for each course/class, during which all the respective departmental faculty must be present. The main purpose of this orientation would be to inculcate a sense of bonding and a feeling of fraternity among the freshers, as well as to develop an affinity towards the teaching faculty; (iii) the third orientation programme for fresh students should be conducted at the level of the class/section/division; (iv) one or more counselling sessions must be arranged through out the first week as part of the orientation sessions, during which a professional counsellor should address ‘freshers’ and motivate them to confidently deal with strangers/seniors; (v) during this week each institution should organize cultural events, sports and other activities, for ‘freshers’ to get to know each other; there should be very little or no ‘serious’ academic activity which digresses from the familiarization and sensitization programmes chalked out by the institution; we also recommend that the UGC and other funding bodies must make special allocations for the purpose of enabling institutions to engage counsellors and organize various events that contribute to the building of confidence among the ‘freshers’. (vi) the institution must not only work out a variety of alternative methods of interactions, but should also publicize the details of the orientation programmes described above.  5.16 We recommend that on the arrival of senior students after the first week or after the second week as the case may be, further orientation programmes must be scheduled as follows (i) joint sensitization programme and counselling of both ‘freshers’ and seniors by a professional counsellor; (ii) joint orientation programme of ‘freshers’ and seniors to be addressed by the Principal/Head of the institution, and the anti-ragging committee; (iii) organisation on a large scale of cultural, sports and other activities to provide a platform for the ‘freshers’ and seniors to interact in the presence of faculty members; (iv) in the hostel, the warden should address all students; may request two junior colleagues from the college faculty to assist the warden by becoming resident tutors for a temporary duration; and, the UGC and other funding bodies should provide financial grants for  meeting the expenditure on resident tutors (v) It is strongly recommended that as far as possible faculty members should dine with the hostel residents in their respective hostels to instill a feeling of confidence among the fresh residents.  5.17 The Committee agrees with the views expressed by student leaders of various ideological affiliations with whom it interacted that a thriving and active students’ association of comprising of genuinely enrolled students helps in minimising incidents of ragging, as each competing student group during elections to the student body would have a vested interest in ‘protecting’ target group of fresher voters from being subjected to ragging by others. As a matter of fact, it was repeatedly brought to the notice of the Committee that one of the reasons for engineering and medical or professional colleges being highly ragging prone is due to the absence of genuine student election activity. Although much can be said in this regard, including the evidence that ragging has slowly spread to other types of institutions as well, we recommend that the reforms in student body elections approved by the Hon’ble Supreme Court on the basis of the recommendations of the J.M.Lyngdoh Committee should be implemented expeditiously and the students’ union election must be held within 15 days of the beginning of the academic session. This will undermine the nexus, reported in some places, between campus politics and ragging.  5.18 We recommend that every institution must have an Anti-Ragging Committee and an Anti-Ragging Squad. It is essential to have a diverse mix of membership in terms of levels as well as gender in both the Anti Ragging Squad as well as the Anti-Ragging Committee. The Anti-Ragging Committee at the level of the institution should consist of the representatives of civil and police administration, local media, Non Government Organizations involved in youth activities, representatives of faculty members, representatives of parents, representatives of students belonging to the freshers’ category as well as seniors, non-teaching staff and should be headed by the Head of the Institution. The Anti-Ragging Squad, in contrast, should be a body with vigil, oversight and patrolling functions and should appropriately be a smaller body which should be nominated by the Head of the institution with such representation as considered necessary to keep it mobile, alert and active at all times. The Squad may be called upon to make surprise raids on hostels and other hot  spots and should be empowered to inspect places of potential ragging. The Squad should work under the overall guidance of the Anti-Ragging Committee. The Squad should not have any outside representation and should only consist of members belonging to the various sections of the campus community.  5.19 We recommend that there should also be a ‘Mentoring Cell’ in each institution to oversee and involve senior students as Mentors for the ‘freshers’. The Mentoring Cell should be formed at the end of every academic year where applications should be invited from students to join the Mentoring Cell as Mentors for the succeeding academic year. There should be as many levels or tiers of Mentors as the number of batches in the institution. The Anti-Ragging Squad of the institution and the Head/Principal should be involved in selecting the first level of Mentors who would be chosen from among the batch of students immediately senior to the ‘freshers’. A diverse mix of Mentors would be desirable who would be selected at the ratio of one student for a certain number of ‘freshers’. It has been observed that a ratio of 1:6 is optimal. There should be a hierarchy of Mentors, that is, for every group of six Mentors chosen from the 2nd year or the batch immediately senior to the ‘freshers’, there should be one second level Mentor. Then there would be one third year student per six Mentors of the second level and so on. At every level of Mentors, there should be a Faculty Adviser. The warden and faculty would directly deal with the highest level of Mentors, which is not to say that they would not interact with the other tiers of Mentors, but such interaction would be more indirect. Every Mentor at the first level should be allowed in to the hostel when ‘freshers’ join and, ‘freshers’ and Mentors should be introduced to each other. The Mentors would help ‘freshers’ in settling down. This makes sure that ‘freshers’ have some seniors to fall back on without the fear of ragging and would serve by way of “peer counselling”. This model has been implemented in some places and has been successful. The third year Mentors and the faculty in-charge should oversee the working of the Mentoring Cell and make sure that the Mentors don’t misuse their powers.  5.20 We also recommend that anonymous random surveys must be conducted by each institution, across the entire 1st year batch of students (‘freshers’) every fortnight during the first three months of the academic session in  order to verify and cross-check whether the campus is indeed free of ragging or not. The institution may design its own methodology of conducting such a survey. It is extremely important that the institution does not compromise the anonymity of the whistle blowers.  5.21 The job requirement for the warden calls for a dedicated cadre of trained and specially qualified professionals. In a situation of shortage of teachers in higher education, sparing academics for the duties of wardens also needs to be reviewed. We feel that it is unfair to thrust this specialized responsibility on teachers and other academics who have to discharge the functions in addition to the demands of teaching or research. This is not, however, to suggest that academics can not discharge the obligations of the warden, indeed a large number of them are already doing it successfully, but this arrangement is not desirable in all cases. We recommend that the UGC and other regulatory bodies should lay down the eligibility of the post of warden reflecting both the command and control aspects of maintaining discipline, as well as the softer skills of counselling and communicating with the youth outside of the class-room situations. The post of warden must carry the necessary incentive to attract the right type of eligible candidates, and motivate the incumbent.  5.22 We recommend that in the light of the increasing number of private commercially managed lodges or hostels outside campuses, such hostels and management must be registered with the local police authorities and permission to start such hostels or register them must necessarily be recommended by the Heads of educational institutions. It should be mandatory for both local police, local administration as well the institutional authorities to ensure vigil on incidents that may come with in the definition of ragging. Managements of such private hostels should be responsible for non-reporting of cases of ragging in such premises. Local authorities as well as the institutional authorities should be responsible for action in the event of ragging in such premises, just as they would be for incidents within campuses. The Committee also recommends that besides registering private hostels as stated above, the towns or cities where educational institutions are located should be apportioned as sectors among faculty members, as is being done by some institutions, so that they could maintain vigil and report any incidents of ragging outside campuses and en route while ‘freshers’ commute.  5.23 The Committee respects the autonomy of academic institutions and believes that to the extent possible incidents of harassment of ‘freshers’ by seniors should be dealt with under the prevalent ordinances or statutes and the procedures prescribed thereunder or under the provisions of the relevant State law. However, where the victim or his/her parent/guardian is not satisfied with the action taken by the Head of the institution or by other institutional authorities, or where the Head of the institution is of the opinion that the incident ought to be so reported, it must be mandatory for the institution to file a First Information Report with the local police authorities. Such reports should also be made to the civil Authorities (such as Sub Divisional Magistrate, Deputy Commissioner or District Magistrate), the higher Police Authorities (Commissioner or Superintendent of Police or his Deputies) and also to the media for wider dissemination. In incidents of extreme sensitivity or grave consequences, such reports should also be made to the appropriate State Authorities. Media reports may at times kindle the interest of civil society activists and Non Government Organizations, whose involvement in tackling incidents of ragging or the prevention of such incidents must be welcomed and not looked upon as any hindrance. Universities and State or Central Governments should also encourage institutional authorities to share information in respect of ragging, rather than sweeping any incident under the carpet; we believe that reporting information about incidents of ragging contributes to the prevention and recurrence of such incidents, while attempts to cover up only result in more unreported incidents taking place and matters getting out of control for the authorities. The Committee expects the sub-divisional, district and divisional or State level authorities also to share information rather than prevent access to information for the media and the civil society.  5.24 The Committee recommends that institutions must adhere to complaints in regard to ragging or any suo motu information in respect thereof, which its authorities may come across promptly, and all relevant and necessary action must be attended to with great despatch. The complaints or information in regard to ragging could be oral or written and even from third parties and the confidentiality of the source of information must be protected at all costs. Remedial action must be initiated and completed with in the week of the incident itself so that complaints do not linger on  and allow either interest in pursuing the matter to vane or enable the culprits to tamper evidence or influence witnesses.  5.25 The Committee recommends that preventing or acting against ragging should be the collective responsibility of all levels and sections of authorities or functionaries with in the institution i.e. administrative head, teaching faculty and non-teaching employees and not merely that of the specific body constituted for prevention of ragging. In case of any incident taking place all the sections must co-ordinate with the sense of moral propriety and share the responsibility and accountability.  5.26 The burden of proof must, in the opinion of the Committee, lie on the perpetrator and not on the victim to prove that ragging did not take place. As mentioned earlier in the previous Chapter, dealing with the Observations of the Committee, we did not come across any significant instance of implementing the earlier directions of the Apex Court in regard to collective punishment in those cases where the perpetrators could not be identified. Nevertheless, the concept of collective fines or punishment is a time-tested method of making both active as well as passive participants or abettors pay for the crime and therefore we recommend that collective punishment must continue to be in force, with a more effective monitoring at higher levels.  5.27 Wardens must be accessible at all hours and therefore it is important that they be available on telephone and other modes of communication – therefore, we recommend that wardens must be issued mobile phones by the institutions and the details of their telephone number must be widely publicised. Similarly, the telephone numbers of the other important functionaries – Heads of institutions, faculty members, members of the anti-ragging committees, district and sub-divisional authorities and state authorities where relevant, should also be widely disseminated for the needy to get in touch or seek help in emergencies. The Committee recommends that brochures or booklet/leaflet distributed to each student at the beginning of each academic session for obtaining undertaking not to indulge or abet ragging, shall contain the blueprint of prevention and methods of redress.  5.28 At the level of the District, we recommend a District level Anti-Ragging  Committee, which should consist of the Heads of Higher Education Institutions as members. It should be headed by the District Collector/Deputy Commissioner/District Magistrate and should also have the Superintendent of Police/ SSP of the District as member. The Additional District Magistrate should be a member-secretary of the Committee, which should also have representation of the local media and district level Non Government Organizations actively associated in youth development programmes, as well as representatives of all student organizations. The District level Committee should hold preparatory meetings during the summer vacation meetings to take stock of the state of preparedness of each institution and their compliance with the policies and directions or guidelines of the appropriate bodies, the university/State/Central authorities; and the Apex Court’s guidelines in regard to curbing the menace of ragging. We have already emphasized on the need for publicity campaigns, summer months may be appropriate to launch such campaigns. Some of the role expectations from the District level Committees have already been mentioned in the preceding paragraphs dealing with activities at the level of Schools as well as higher education institutions and therefore are not being repeated.  5.29 We have thought through the suggestion that the District level Committee should function as some sort of an appellate forum to the action taken by the institution level Anti-Ragging Committee. We feel that this is neither necessary nor desirable. It is not necessary in the context of the recommendation that we propose to make in respect of the scheme of penalty later in this Chapter. It is not desirable from the point of view that such a mechanism lends an extra-campus dimension to the tackling of intra-campus disciplinary matters. All matters of discipline within teaching institutions, in our opinion, must be resolved within the campus – except those impinging on law and order or breach of peace or public tranquillity, all of which should be dealt with under the penal laws of the land; fortifying of which is being suggested by us later on.  5.30 At the level of the University, we recommend that there should be a Monitoring Cell on Ragging, which should coordinate with the affiliated colleges and institutions under its domain. The Cell should call for reports from the Heads of institutions in regard to the activities of the Anti Ragging Committees, Anti-Ragging Squads, Mentoring Cells at the level of  the institution, the compliance with instructions on conducting orientation programmes, counselling sessions, the incidents of ragging, the problems faced by wardens or other officials. It should also keep itself abreast of the decisions of the District level Anti-Ragging Committee. This Monitoring Cell should also review the efforts made by institutions to publicize anti ragging measures, soliciting of undertaking from parents and students each year to abstain from ragging activities or willingness to be penalized for violations; and should function as the prime mover for initiating action on the part of the appropriate authorities of the university for amending the Statutes or Ordinances or Bye-laws to facilitate the implementation of anti-ragging measures at the level of the institution.  5.31 At the State level, we recommend that there should be a Monitoring Cell at the level of the Chancellor of the State Universities, who may also coordinate with those of the Central Government institutions located in the State in which the Governor has a defined role under the relevant law. Governors, in their capacity as Chancellors of State Universities, can leverage the influence of their office to ensure that the State Government as well as the university authorities are suitably instructed to be alert in regard to ragging. The involvement of Governors would also ensure that the autonomy of institutions of higher learning is not compromised. In addition, Governors of States are associated with Central Universities in their role as Chief Rector/Chancellor etc. and can oversee the function of coordination where required vis a vis the office of the President of India in his capacity as the Visitor of the Central Universities and also the Central Government in the Ministry of Human Resource Development. The State level Monitoring Cell should receive periodically, and at such frequencies that it may lay down, status reports from the University level Monitoring Cells and District level Anti-Ragging Committees.  5.32 The Heads of institutions should be required to submit, to the Vice Chancellor of the University, weekly reports during first three months of the reopening of the institution and there after reports each month on the status of compliance with anti-ragging measures. The Vice Chancellor should submit fortnightly reports of the University level Monitoring Cell to the State level Cell under the Chancellor. The fortnightly reports as well as the weekly reports should be compulsorily shared with the media, so that ‘nil’ reports if any are also in the public domain. Wide publicity, including  mandatory hosting of information on the institutional web-site, should be given to such ‘nil’ reports so that the media acts as a ‘watchdog’ for feed back and citizens exercise their Right to Information, in case false claims are made by institutions with a view to protect their “reputation”.  5.33 At the National level, we recommend that the University Grants Commission should be responsible for coordinating and monitoring the anti-ragging movement across the country and should constitute a Board for Coordination consisting of the following : (i) representative of the AICTE (ii) a representative of the IITs (iii) a representative of the NITs (iv) a representative of the IIMs (v) a representative of the MCI (vi) representative of the DCI (vii) a representative of the NCI (viii) a representative of the ICAR (viii) a representative of the Veterinary Council and such other representatives as have to do with higher education and are not represented in the categories mentioned above. The Committee has already expressed its disappointment that despite the passage of over six years since the directions of the Apex Court, neither the UGC nor any of the statutory authorities in the different sectors of higher education have focussed their attention in dealing with the menace of ragging. The UGC should constitute an institutional mechanism – such as a Cell within the Commission to provide secretarial support for collection of information and monitoring. There should be no delay on this account for any reason, the Cell should be carved out of its existing secretariat and should coordinate with the State level and University level Committees for effective implementation of anti-ragging measures. The UGC and the other statutory authorities should intervene wherever their existing guidelines or academic instructions come in the way of implementation of the recommendations being made in this report. The Commission and the other funding bodies should also provide adequate funds to universities and colleges for carrying out the mandate of curbing incidents of ragging. It should coordinate with the other statutory authorities (AICTE, MCI, DCI, ICAR, NCTE, NCI etc) so that timely instructions are sent by such authorities for enabling or mandating institutions to prevent and prohibit ragging as well as to take action against institutions that tolerate or do not report incidents of ragging. The UGC and the other funding agencies should also work out a mechanism of providing grants-in-aid where institutions successfully prevent occurrence of ragging or where stern action is taken by institutions against ragging incidents.  5.34 The UGC and the statutory bodies must issue the necessary guidelines or regulations prescribing the qualifications and eligibility of persons for holding the post of wardens in hostels. They should work out a suitable scale of pay for the post of wardens and also assist institutions to create sufficient number of posts in the cadre of wardens during the XI th Plan period for which allocations should be provided by the Commission. Just as the UGC must ensure that every hostel in the academic institutions must have a professional warden as stated above the AICTE, MCI etc. and State Governments should be responsible for the appointments of the respective Cadre of wardens. The necessary facilitating amendments must be carried out in the statutes of universities and other institutions for the purpose of creating the new Cadre. The UGC may also consider encouraging universities to start specialized courses and programmes of study in Hostel Administration.  5.35 One class of institutions not covered under our recommendations above is that of the institutions deemed to be universities, which come under the purview of the UGC and the Central Government. These institutions, commonly referred to as “deemed universities” consist of constituent units which impart all types of higher education including professional education in engineering, medicine etc. Ragging is stated to be as prevalent in several of them as in other public institutions or universities established by legislatures of States or by Parliament. Monitoring the status of anti-ragging measures and prevention of incidents of ragging in these institutions would logically be the responsibility of the University Grants Commission’s national level Monitoring Cell. It should be ensured that the directions in regard to the setting up of Anti-Ragging Committees, Anti-Ragging Squads, Mentoring Cells recommended by us in respect of institutions are complied with by the constituent units of deemed universities as well. The anti-ragging mechanism at the level of such constituent units of deemed universities must coordinate its activities vis a vis the district level mechanism recommended by us in earlier paragraphs. Similarly, each deemed university should constitute the university level monitoring cell which should coordinate the anti-ragging activities at the level of the constituent units and should also report to the Monitoring Cell at the UGC.  5.36 Compliance with anti-ragging measures recommended and required to be brought in to effect by institutions of higher education, universities as well as deemed universities, should be adequately recognized by the UGC and other statutory authorities while earmarking financial assistance to them as well as while according them academic recognition or while granting expansion in capacity of seats in various branches of study or while sanctioning new programmes of study.  5.37 What should be the role of the State Governments and the Central Government in the efforts to curb the menace of ragging? We recommend that the responsibility of generating mass awareness and public opinion against ragging is a function which the appropriate Governments through the machinery at their disposal and through intelligent use of the media as well as cooption of civil society activists can accomplish efficiently. We recommend that there should be media advisory committees at the level of each State Government and at the national level with the Central Government which should chalk out campaign strategies and prepare effective messages for propagation. The Press Information Bureau of the Central Government should cull out all reported incidents of ragging and forward the same to the MHRD / UGC for monitoring – the fact that the Committee had to depend on the assistance provided by Non Government Organizations for documentation in regard to the reported incidents of ragging over the years, points to the absence of any centralized mechanism to monitor such incidents in an authentic manner.  5.38 Non Government initiatives in anti-ragging movement need to be supported in order to bring about qualitative improvement and efficient outcomes. The Committee recommends that the Government of India, and State Governments support such organizations to widen and intensify their activities. They could be helped to launch awareness programmes either on their own or in collaboration with the media related efforts of the Central or State Governments. Such efforts by the civil society may encourage parents and other well-wishers of ‘freshers’ to exercise various rights including the Right to Information for ascertaining the real situation in our campuses.  5.39 Similarly, the Directorates of Information and Public Relations of State Governments should ensure that there is widest possible publicity to anti  ragging measures adopted in each State or what is prescribed under national guidelines. In States with anti-ragging laws in place, the responsibility of enforcement also lies squarely with the State Governments, including the responsibility to make rules under the Act. There is a larger reason for launching a sustained media campaign to sensitize the public, with less than 10% of the population in the relevant age group of 18 years to 23 years enrolled in all sectors of higher education, due to the low access to higher education, even less in professional colleges, lower still in hostels, the public at large being too distanced from the problems that beset higher educational campuses. The problem of ragging may therefore seem too exclusive to most and too remote to happen to oneself – precisely why it needs to occupy centre stage in public debates on higher education.  5.40 Yet another role of the Central Government, through its agency for censoring and certifying films, would be to ensure that appropriate directives are in place so that films which have a deep impress on young minds do not eulogize ragging; we recommend that such directives should be issued by the Centre Board of Film Certification, similar to the instructions on alcoholism, smoking or in regard to vulgarity.  5.41 We also recommend that the policy in regard to migration of students from one university or institution to another whether in the same State or outside the State needs to be reviewed by the UGC and the appropriate statutory authorities. While victims of ragging would find it helpful to be ‘evacuated’ from a notorious institution, the misuse of such a facility by students trying to gain transfer to institutions of their choice, pretending to be victims of ragging can also not be ruled out. This issue needs to be approached with circumspection. Also, it is not necessary that the institution to which a student victim of ragging is migrated would be less trouble prone than the one being left behind. In any case there has to be a case to case approach based on the merit of each.  5.42 We recommend that the National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) or other accrediting bodies should factor any incident of ragging while accrediting institutions in different grades. Thus an institution which has been unable to prevent ragging or where incidents of ragging do not abate should be given a negative rating appropriately so that its overall  grading is affected.  5.43 The committee recommends that at the national level, the UGC should fund a toll-free Helpline which could be accessed by students in distress owing to ragging related incidents. The Ministry of Communication and Information Technology should facilitate the establishment, infrastructure and operation of the proposed Helpline. Any distress message should be simultaneously relayed to the Head of the Institution, warden or officer of the Hostels, District authorities including the Superintendent of Police, and should be web-linked so as to be in the public domain simultaneously for the media and citizens to access it. A genuine message of distress from the victim of ragging should make it obligatory for the Head of the institution and civil authorities to initiate action on the lines already suggested by us.  5.44 Timely communication being the key to attending to distress signals from victims of ragging, we recommend that access to mobile phones as well public phones should be unrestricted in hostels and campuses with reasonable restrictions on the use of mobile phones in class rooms or other prohibited places in the Campus through the use of technology (using jammers) rather than banning the use of cell phones by students. If necessary the UGC or the universities/institutions should issue appropriate instructions in this regard.  5.45 The Committee recommends that rather than subjecting each incident of ragging to a different penal treatment under various sections of the Indian Penal Code, a new section should be added to the IPC, making ragging a punishable offence on the analogy of section 498A dealing with cruelty towards women (against dowry related incidents). We have already explained that ragging is an offence with a multiplicity of ingredients, each of which constitutes an offence punishable under the existing provisions of the Indian Penal Code. We further recommend that the Indian Evidence Act should also be suitably amended on the analogy of section 113A of that Act, to shift the burden of proof on those accused of ragging.  5.46 We recommend that a comprehensive definition should be included by way of explanation in the proposed new section on ragging in the IPC, and all the punishable ingredients namely, abetment to ragging, criminal  conspiracy to rag, unlawful assembly and rioting while ragging, public nuisance created during ragging, violation of decency and morals through ragging, injury to body, causing hurt or grievous hurt, wrongful restraint, wrongful confinement, use of criminal force, assault as well as sexual offences or even unnatural offences, extortion, criminal trespass, offences against property, criminal intimidation and attempts to commit any or all of the above mentioned offences against the victim should be incorporated thereto, prescribing appropriate punishments in respect of one or a group of offences.  5.47 The Committee believes that there can not be a half way house in dealing with the menace of ragging. Mild and soft approach to ragging, even though required, has clearly not worked so far in curbing the menace. For example, punishments in the form of cancellation of admission, suspension from attending the classes, withholding/withdrawing scholarships, fellowship and other benefits, individual or collective fines, debarring from appearing in any test/examination and other evaluation process, withholding results, debarring from representing the institution in any national and international meet, tournament, youth festival, etc, suspension/expulsion from the hostel, rustication from the institution for periods varying from one or more semesters, expulsion from the institution and consequent debarring from admission to any other institution – all exist. The existing punishments can not be substitutes for the penal provisions of law, but only in addition to the punishments that must be handed out under the Indian Penal Code. We see no reason why enrolment in an institution or an academic programme should immunize perpetrators of heinous crimes which otherwise attract the penal provisions of law if committed by an adult citizen outside the academic precincts. Our message to the academic community is to ensure good governance which will respect human dignity by all concerned. It would indeed be sad if the penal provisions of law were to be used as a matter of routine to enforce deterrence in campuses.  5.48 Times have changed since the Hon’ble Supreme Court’s caution of treating those indulging in ragging not as criminals and advising restraint in the use of the police force. While the intervention and presence of police in campuses is to be avoided normally, considering the alarming proportions the severity of ragging has grown to, we recommend that even as every  possible measure to prevent ragging is taken on the lines recommended by us in the preceding paragraphs of this Chapter and such action is taken at every level – that of Schools, Institutions, Districts, Universities, States and finally at the national level – even as every possible strategy should be adopted to sensitize the public against the evils and ills of ragging through the use of the media and the civil society at each of the levels described by us; the time has come to treat every single incident of ragging, however isolated or “mild” or “positive” it may appear, with the heaviest hand possible. In support of our argument we could come across no judicial pronouncement better than the one in the matter of Thiruvananthapuram Government Engineering College Vs State of Kerala [WP (C) 656 of 1998; 2000 (2) KLT 11] in which Arijit Pasayat, CJ (as his Lordship then was) writing for a division bench of the High Court of Kerala held;  “..What was intended to be in good faith and provide untainted fun is now characterized as physical torture with a sadistic tendency and sexual perversions. There are few reported cases of loss of life also. One thing is clear that ragging, which was originally thought of to be a mere joke, has crossed bounds of decency and had entered the arena of physical and mental torture. It needs to be dealt with iron hands...”  5.49 We recommend that the punishment to be meted out has to be exemplary and justifiably harsh to act as a deterrance against recurrence of such incidents. We therefore recommend that every single incident of ragging, where the victim or his parent/guardian or the Head of institution is not satisfied with the institutional arrangement for action a First Information Report must be filed compulsorily by the institutional authority with the local police authorities. We believe that the institutional authorities would become aware of such incidents through one of the many channels already identified by us – the anti-ragging squads, anti-ragging committees, mentoring cells, distress calls redirected by the Help Line, by NGOs, by the media and so on. Any failure or negligence or deliberate delay on the part of the institutional authority (comprising of the Head of Institution, the Warden etc.) to file an FIR with the local police, on the dissatisfaction of the victim with the institutional redress mechanism or suo motu by the Head of institution, should render the negligence culpable. Needless to add that every victim or his parent/guardian of ragging can also file an FIR  directly with the police, but failure on the part of the victim to do so should not justify the delay, or neglect or failure on the part of the institutional authorities.  5.50 We recommend that the Criminal Procedure Code should be amended to ensure that cases involving ragging are tried on the fast-track so that there are no delays in dealing with such matters, keeping in mind the academic priorities of students who may be required to depose before the courts to assist the prosecution while the matter is sub judice.  -0  ANNEXURE  I F. No. 9-98/2006.U-5 Government of India Ministry of Human Resource Development Department of Higher Education ******  New Delhi dated 5th December 2006  Sub: Constitution of Committee to look into the issue of ragging and  suggest means of prevention in educational institutions.  Whereas the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in a Special Leave Petition No. 24295 of 2006 in the matter of University of Kerala Vs the Council of Principals of colleges on 27th November 2006 directed the Constitution of the Committee consisting of persons mentioned in the order of the Hon’ble Court and has also directed the Committee to nominate two other members to the said Committee. The Central Government hereby constitutes and notifies the Committee consisting of the following persons to give suggestions on means of prevention of ragging in educational institutions.  S.No. Name and Disignation Position  1. Shri R.K. Raghavan Chairman  Former Director, CBI. Sri Ramaswamy Street, Old No.3,  Nepery, Near Ewart School, Chennai – 7  2. Prof. Sanjay Govind Dhande Member  Director, IIT, Kanpur – 208016  3. Dr. A.K. Agarwal -do  Dean, Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi – 110007  4. Dr Rajendra Prasad -do  Principal, Ramjas College New Delhi  5. Member from Chennai.  6. Member from Mumbai  7. Shri Sunil Kumar Member Secretary  Joint Secretary Department of Higher Education  2. The terms of reference of the Committee would be to see:  (a) The various aspects of ragging. (b) Means and methods of prevention of ragging. (c) Possible action that can be taken against persons indulging in  ragging and (d) Possible action that can be taken against college/university  authorities in the event of ragging.  3. Smt. Anupama Bhatanagar, Director in the Department of Higher education would assist in the work relating to the Committee. The secretarial assistance, logistic arrangement and other expenditure would be met out of the budget of the Department of Higher Education.  4. The Committee shall submit its report by 5th April 2007.  -Sd (Anupama Bhatnagar) Director  Copy to  1. The Chairman, and all the members of the Committee. 2. The Additional Solicitor General of India, Supreme Court of India  w.r.t. their letter dated 27th November 2006. 3. PS to HRM 4. Sr. PPS to ES. 5. PS to JS (FA), HRD. 6. PPS to JS (HE) 7. Guard File.  ANNEXURE II  Final composition of the Committee constituted by the Hon’ble Supreme Court to look into the issue of ragging and suggest means of prevention in educational institutions.  1. Dr. R.K.Raghavan, Chairman  Former Director, CBI  2. Prof. Sanjay Govind Dhande, Member  Director, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur  3. Prof. A.K.Agarwal, -do  Dean, Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi  4. Dr. Rajendra Prasad, -do  Principal, Ramjas College, New Delhi  5. Dr. Chandra Krishnamurthy -do  Vice-Chancellor, SNDT Women’s University Mumbai  6. Prof. S. Sathikh, -do  Former Vice-Chancellor Madras University, Chennai  7. Shri Sunil Kumar,  Joint Secretary, Ministry of HRD, Member  Convener Government of India, New Delhi  ANNEXURE III  Notes on the interactions of the Committee with various stake-holders:  The Committee met for the first time on the 30th Dec.2006 at New Delhi. Dr. R.K. Raghavan, Chairperson designated by the Hon’ble Supreme Court gave a brief outline of the purpose of Constituting the Committee by the Court. He described prevailing situation in educational institutions, the emerging issues and challenges and the ways and means to curb the practice of ragging. The invited speakers and members of the Committee deliberated at length on various issues involved. The views expressed by the participants are summarized below:  Dr. Aruna Broota, formerly of the Department of Psychology, University of Delhi, Delhi spoke about the need to understand the psychological underpinnings of ragging. She stated that while there were more than fifty students in a hostel and more than a thousand in an institution, all did not indulge in ragging. It is only a core group of students who are bullies and have severe personality disorders and are a terror in the hostel or the class in the college/institution. Such students have to be identified and referred to professional psychologists, the Head of the Institution and the appropriate committee to enquire into such incidents. Prof. Broota recommended that all students who seek admission should go through mental-health checkup; that checkup must be intensified at the stage of class XI, which was the time when the anxiety relating to one public Board examination (class X) gets over and students are at the peak of physiological transformation and bodily development. Their physical size reaches almost that of an adult, and they start resisting authority and parents do not know how to handle the situation. Prof. Broota recommended that all students of Class XI must undergo six monthly mental health check-up, which would not only help identify aggression, hostility, anger and anxiety; but would also help underachievers to perform better. It will help in a better personality growth of each child. Prof. Broota pointed out that schools give out only a stereotyped character certificate to students at the time of leaving school after the XIIth grade; which should be converted into a personality assessment certificate and the assessment of character should only be a part thereof.  Prof. M.A. Khader, Head, Curriculum Group, National Council of Educational  Research and Training, New Delhi looked at ragging as a behavioral problem  occurring in higher education institutions, particularly in institutions of  professional education. He is of the view that the act of ragging is deeply rooted  in emotional content, dominated by aggression with a touch of sadism.  Invariably, according to Prof. Khader, this form of behaviour took place in a  crowd, which provides for anonymity. Often the victim declines to identify the  offender due to perception of threat or anticipated future consequences. In  educational parlance, ragging is a group action and the consequences are  multiple and the issues involved are complex. In fact, the issues stemming from  ragging are essentially linked to discipline in the higher education system.  The National Curriculum Framework (NCF) 2005 which covers the school sector  of education obviously does not reflect on ragging but speaks of discipline from  the perspective of participatory management. Forms of discipline such as  corporal punishment, verbal and non-verbal abuse etc. continue to feature in our  educational system. Teachers and even parents unaware of the immediate and  long-term detriment effects of such practices still believe that such punishment is  important. He called for evolving systems of participatory management of  student behaviour involving students and teachers within each institution and  setting codes for self-governance. Advocacy programmes focusing on the ill  effects of ragging involving important personalities/public figures in each  campus could, according to him, be considered along with measures such as the  provision of guidance and counselling services within each institution, creating a  forum for healthy interaction between ‘freshers’ and seniors (e.g. Talents Day)  and holding ‘freshers’ day within a month of the commencement of the course.  Prof. Khader also drew attention to the observation that very often, once children  were admitted to a course of study in a residential campus, parents were guided  by the notion that the responsibility of their ward's conduct rested with the  wardens or the college authority; forgetting that in reality it was a collective  responsibility with parents/guardians being integral to it. He suggested a suitable  mechanism whereby active involvement of parents and interaction with teachers  could be ensured. He was of the opinion that a law against ragging could be  enacted, however it was difficult to support witnesses or police the student  community; and any such law ought to factor in the ground realities.  M/s Sachin Agarwal and Shivam Vij from the SPACE (Society for People's  Action, Change and Enforcement) made an elaborate presentation. Since May 2004, SPACE has been working on an advocacy & research campaign to curb ragging. The campaign has largely been conducted over the internet but also consisted of on-ground interaction with students in hostels across the country. According to the SPACE, Supreme Court's order asks educational institutions to generate an “atmosphere of discipline by sending a clear message that no act of ragging shall be tolerated and any act of ragging shall not go unnoticed and unpunished”. Thus, these words of the Supreme Court of India seem to imply a zero-tolerance approach but students and college administration alike use words like 'mild-ragging’ and have found alternative words such as 'interaction' and “introduction” to justify the continuance of the practice. SPACE suggested that a law against ragging enacted by Parliament and made uniformly applicable in each and every education institution of the country would go a long way. The Society also suggested the need for establishing one or more full-time ‘anti ragging cells’ at the central level. This may take the form of an independent authority or may be part of such institutions such as the UGC/AICTE/ other affiliating authorities, HRD Ministry or the National Human Rights Commission. One function of any such anti-ragging cell would be to act as a ‘Helpline’. Complaints against ragging should be received by such a cell from across the country via post or email. It was pointed out to the Committee by SPACE that the Directorate of Medical Education in Andhra Pradesh had successfully tried a web-format, where ragging victims file their complaints. If a victim is particularly disturbed, the cell could quietly arrange for counselling the victim. Such a cell would, however, have to be sensitive to the victim's desire for anonymity so that the victim does not run the risk of ostracisation from the campus community. However, if the complainant explicitly demands an inquiry in a particular ragging incident, files an FIR, takes legal action, etc., s/he would obviously not ask for anonymity. In respect of anonymous complaints, an enquiry targeting particular seniors may not be fair as such a complaint could be fake or motivated by extraneous complaints therefore, such a cell should undertake independent investigations as to the prevalence of ragging in that institution. It may thereafter recommend action against such institutions to the UGC/AICTE/other affiliating bodies. According to SPACE, the proposed Cells could put in place a monitoring mechanism to enforce compliance with the Supreme Court’s guidelines and the relevant applicable laws. Each education institution should present to the National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) and the National Board of Accreditation (NBA), as the case may be, an annual report about the compliance about the status of ragging in their institutions, including  the number and nature of ragging complaints received, and how they were handled and solved. Bodies like the NAAC of the University Grants Commission and the NBA of the All India Council of Technical Education should take into account the status of ragging in educational institutions before awarding ratings.  Ms. Ragini Naik, President, Delhi University Students Union, felt that ragging was a prevalent norm. It systematized Human Rights’ abuse, which has become something of a tradition and a self-perpetuating vicious cycle. She also felt that more and more redress methods were required to help the victims of ragging. Anti-ragging squads shall play proactive roll to curb incidents of ragging. Interactive sessions with freshers and seniors are likely to attend this issue.  Prof. Sanjay Govind Dhande, Director, IIT, Kanpur and Member of the Committee was of the opinion that ragging cannot be prevented without the pro active involvement of the faculty. He advised that an ‘anti-ragging’ advertising campaign may be launched. A 24 hours’ ‘Helpline’ may be set up for providing necessary support to the victims of ragging.  The meeting proceeded to nominate two additional Members as directed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court. After discussions the names of Prof. Chandra Krishnamurthi, Vice Chancellor, SNDT Women’s University, Mumbai and Prof. Sathik, former Vice Chancellor, Madras University were agreed upon and it was decided to seek their consent and also to invite them along with the other Members for the meeting of the Committee scheduled for Guwahati for the North East. Other venues and dates were also discussed. It was also decided to prepare a web-page for soliciting comments and suggestions as also to give wider publicity to the same. It was also decided to write to States and to publicize the visits of the Committee as per its approved programme so that the Committee could interact with a wide cross-section of stake holders.  2. Venue : Guwahati  Present : All Members except Prof Dhande who was given leave of absence owing to other prior commitments.  After Opening remarks by the Chairman and introductions by the Member Convener the assembled participants were invited to offer suggestions.  Prof Goswami, Dean, College of Vet. Sc., Assam Agriculture University, Khanapara.: Do not know the details of the State Act (Assam). But university has procedures in place. Making newcomers feel welcome. Free of ragging for the last 6-7 years. General circular is sent out informing that there is a ban on ragging. Staff addresses students. Dean addresses students union. Committee for prmomtion of intereaction between students nad new comers. This committee if strengthened can prevent ragging – students must feel responsible for preventing ragging. Also a Vigilance Committee includes warden, squads made. Hostel guidelines. Teacher advisor assigned with newcomers and linked with the cohort. Academic regulations exist – expulsion or rustication for a minimum of two semesters.  Rintudatta Bora – student – Cotton college : incidents of ragging declining due to competition. Mere introductions should not be branded as ragging. Every society has a manner of interaction. There is an antiragging committee in the College. There should be an officer in the state government to look into problems of ragging and one designated in each institution. Students are more busy in preparing for careers in Cotton College.  Gautimi Saikia – Handique Girls’ College : Secretary : There is no serious ragging. Only mild teasing in the college ; seniors show off their seniority; there should be orientation courses.  Shri Mahananda Bodo : Arya Vidyapeeth College : Mangal Doi College where Seniors used to ask embarrassing questions some three years ago. This went on for two years. He was so scared that he did not wish to attend classes. This did not have a caste or tribal bias, this was just the tradition there of harsh ragging.  Dr Rajendra Prasad : cant believe that there is no ragging.  Dr Goswami: one reason is that there are very few students that is why there is no ragging. We should allow some degree of fun and interaction with seniors.  Joiam Aku : Arunachal Pradesh : Two years ago was admitted to the hostel. Had many apprehensions. Had khujili dance. My seniors liked me. I also liked to mix with seniors. We must interact with the seniors. It depends on each junior how they take the ragging done.  Arihant Goswami: KCDas Commerce College: There have been no cases of ragging. We have a stage ragging in the presence of teachers, where questions are asked. Ragging is very inappropriate, morally very bad. There are other ways than ragging to get to know your seniors. Co-educational college.  Dr RK Pathak: ex hostel warden for 4 years. Guwahati Commerce College. Observed changes in ragging over the years. It is a social problem. KCDas college has no hostel. Ragging takes place at midnight. None can detect. Superintendent can not be a watch dog. At our time ragging was fun, now extortion and use of force. It should be taken from the points of view of parents – students and administration. Parents of students who take part in ragging must be told of their responsibility. Student representatives in hostels must be given the responsibility. Ragging is very painful. Expulsions have led to fewer students in hostels over the years. Interaction between seniors and juniors should be helpful but taking money from juniors, clothes, other luggage, force, canteen payments for seniors, sexual abuse. All teachers and others must be made aware of the law, simply having a law may not work. Change in the mental attitude among all three pillars of higher education is critical.  Dr S.Sarkar: Vice Principal : Guwahati Commerce College: Either at the state level or at the district level there should be an officer in charge for ragging related matters. My own brother was physically tortured. We are not aware of the ragging prevention law of the state. If the teachers can morally develop students. Moral science courses should inculcate awareness against ragging at the school level.  Dr AC Talukdar: Arya Vidyapeeth College: Principal: Ex student of Cotton College, a hosteler and was also superintendent of hostel in the AVC. Have been ragged as a hosteler and have curbed ragging as a warden. Ragging is imposed on poor rural students by the urban students who think they are smart. No one has a right to imposed their will on others. Mental harm caused to students is more dangerous than physical harm. We have formed counseling cell – identify and work on the “smart” ones. Throwing out an student is the last resort and signal a failure on the part of the administration.  Dr. Dinesh Vaishya: B. Barua College: principal: have been teacher for 30 years in the same college. Most of my students I thought were serious and good, but after joining as principal I have discovered that a good percentage of my  students and students in other colleges of Guwahati as well are addicted to drugs. It is a miniscule minority of 2-3% students who create problems. Even injurious weapons are used in ragging in some cases. I cannot expel all the students who create problems. Even guardians and authorities are helpless. There should be regular psychological counseling in each college not only to attend to ragging but a number of other social psychological problems. There should be a provision for counseling cells – UGC or governments should provide for them.  Mr. Ravinder Kumar: Father of a student of Dr BR Ambedkar NIT Jullandhar: and four parents of some students who were expelled from the said NIT. One of the parents is a teacher of the KV Guwahati. Institutions responsible for the behaviour of students. (written statement given by these parents). So called ragging which is yet to be proved. 11th October, 2005. This is an important case study for the committee. 10 students were put behind bar, including a girl student. 16th October, 2005 : Star News had whipped up public sentiments. Veer Zara music used, chain sms was used. The whole file will be put up to the Committee. False news was telecast by the media, said that these 10 students were absconding – whereas they had been arrested from their rooms. Innocent students should not be implicated – that is the counterpoint in ragging incidents. The case is before Supreme Court. Till proved guilty,educational access should not be denied to those students who are charged. Fast track courts for such cases. Students should not be put along with criminals in jails, this would protect such students who had been successful students. What about the duty of authorities, what about the accountability of wardens. The child who had died also used to tell his parents (Amit Gangwar’s parents) about ragging – wasn’t it their responsibility also.  Dr Adithi Maithi : Vice Principal : Handique Girls’ College: A meeting the nature of today’s meeting should be held at the level of different colleges. Introductory events cannot be called ragging – I was a hosteller at Cotton College and was also warden and monitor. Preliminary self introduction events should not be taken amiss. Some students are nervous, it is good to have some such event. Drug addiction is becoming rampant – drug awareness programmes have proved to be useful in our institution. Therefore what is required is to create awareness among students.  SC Ray: Deputy Secretary, UGC: Role of the UGC – funds are being provided for organizing seminars and conferences – Principals should take advantage of the  scheme. Have had personal experience of being subjected to ragging  Show of power by seniors. Suggestion would be that institutions should as early as possible organize open stage programmes for bringing together seniors and juniors. There is no point in blaming students or their parents – it is necessary to look at the background – school level.  Siddharta Jyoti Das: Assam Engineering Institute polytechnic: Office Bearer: earlier at Pragjyotis College where had a Mixed experience of ragging. Administrative heads should own the responsibility and should keep things under control because ragging invariably degenerates. Even at the time of admission, outsiders and seniors come and extort money even on the day of admission. Students are taken outside the classroom and beaten up. Sometimes students have to leave school and administrative authorities are lax. Since the Principal takes a lot of interest.  Prof. Saathik: is there a system of putting  Dr PK Goswami: Director Technical Education: this year the Principal of Assam Engg. College has rusticated students for ragging. Nobody should be denied the opportunity to study with an undertaking that they behave well.  Indrani Gogoi: Guwahati Commerce College: Secretary, College Debating Society: Introduction is healthy and should be encouraged. But harmful ragging is seen in hostels and outside the college campus. Former students extort. Make ‘‘freshers’’dance on the foot path. Ragging should not be banned only harmful ragging should be banned. One would feel bad if one is not ragged. Action should be taken against culprits. Student Unions can play an important role in curbing ragging.  Prabhat Meiti: Students General secretary: College of Vet. Sc.: Ragging is a disease among the students community which is passed on from seniors to juniors and so on. There should be extracurricular activities to keep students engaged. There is no ragging in our college. The Union is very strict. The first general meeting is an occasion to induct the juniors to the institutional culture. Union must take the initiative.  Dr. Gautam Baruah: Director, IIT Guwahati: It is easier to solve technical problems but ragging is a frustrating phenomenon. While it has not taken a  serious turn in the IIT G, but it is there. Some form of deterrence is also important. A strong law as a deterrence must be in place so that the society takes note of. Ragging is thought of as fun, but the seriousness must be emphasized.  Chairperson: closing remarks.  Committee met at Guwahati Airport and discussed the draft skeletal report.  Meeting of the Committee on the 12th February, 2006 : Bhopal, Hotel Lake View Ashok  Present : Shri Raghavan, Chairperson; Prof. Saathik, Dr. Arun Agrawal, Dr. Rajendra Prasad, Prof. Chandra Krishna Murthy, Sunil Kumar (Member-Convener)  On behalf of the Government of Madhya Pradesh, a presentation was made by the Higher Education Department, which mentioned that there was a policy of zero –tolerance towards ragging in the State. Several steps have been taken by the Government in this direction :  From the stage of advertisement itself steps are taken and wide publicity is given, application form in institutions has a printed undertaking that the candidate is aware of the ban on ragging and is aware of the punishment, a similar undertaking is taken from the parent, a Proctorial Committee includes wardens, faculty members and a few senior students, responsibility is fixed on hostel and institution authorities, security personnel are posted at sensitive places.  MP Human Rights Commission, Chairperson Justice NS Azad, has taken up the problem of ragging as a Human Rights violation.  Mr. Dilip Mehra – Principal Secretary  Statistics : 240 institutions of professional education, in the last 4-5 years about half a dozen of students and like number of incidents have taken place, expulsions have been resorted to. There is no state law on the subject, rather than each State enacting legislation, it  may be better that a Central law is made for uniform application.  Prof. P.B.Sharma, VC Rajiv Gandhi Technical University – why is there no ragging in foreign countries; zero tolerance is an absolute must, discipline has to be maintained from within the institution, a very vigilant management, teachers have a very important role. The dimension of the problem is very different from the past – the campuses are becoming very small, day scholars more, vigilance of teachers has declined, most serious cases of late are emerging from private hostels, off-campus ragging is a very serious problem; societal and parental pressure is more these days, apart from the institutional pressure; in any legislation empower institutions and create mechanism and institutions to control it, Hon’ble Supreme Court’s orders already exist, success in Delhi College of Engineering was due to the quick reflexes and proctorial committees came in action and prompt action was taken; set up Help Lines for quick response at the university level; use the Media to create a fear of action and consequences; Raggers have been let off by Courts in the past and students have returned after expulsion. Registration of private hostels, wardens of private hostels are untrained and very often have nothing to do with the institution. Ragging in Metros, Delhi University Specials. Students are not criminals.  Prof Sirohi, VC Barkatullah University, Bhopal – general information is given to students, punitive action has to be taken immediately, IIT Delhi experience – teachers were protecting students; debarring from classes for a semester, expulsion, teachers did not agree to suggestion to mention in the degree certificate about the ragging incidents involving a student who rags, it is extremely difficult to control ragging in private hostels, let us acknowledge that wherever there is group living, some differences are bound to be there however a line needs to be drawn when human rights’ violation takes place.  Chairperson raised the issue whether it was easier to control when incidents take place outside where police can take action. VC Technical University mentioned that policing regularly may help and the information of hostels should be known to the police and the institutions.  Prof Sirohi: senior students should be utilized to control ragging.  Students at institutions in Delhi attract students of different backgrounds and therefore getting to know takes some time and therefore there is some ‘ragging’.