/ / national policy on education 1986 PROGRAMME OF ACTION· 1992 Ministry of Human Resource Development Department of Education CONTENTS 2. Education of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Sections 3. Minorities' Education 4. Education of the Handicapped 5. Adult and Continuing Education 6. Early Childhood Care And Education 7. Elementary Education 8. Secondary Education 9. Navodaya Vidyalayas 10. Vocational Education 11. Higher Education 12. Open Education 13. Delinking Degrees From Jobs and Manpower Planning 14. Rural Universities and Institutes 15. Technical and Management Education 16. Research and Development 17. The Cultural Perspective 18. Development of Languages 19. Media and Educational Technology 20. Sports, Physical Education and Youth 21. Evaluation Process and Examination Reforms _ 22. Teachers and Their Training 23. Management of Education Appendix Composition of Steering Committee and Task Forces Index N.B: (1) These chapters follow the sequence in which NPE, 1986 deals with subjects. Page Acronyms and Abbreviations Introduction v 1. Education for Women's Equality 1 5 9 17 21 29 34 44 50 53 61 71 74 76 77 84 90 94 99 103 106 109 112 119 143 (2) Each chapter deals with aspects of 'Content and Process of Educ:ation', 'Making the·system Work' and management appropriate to it. Therefore, unlike the POA 1986, there are no separate chapters 'Content and Process' and 'Making the System Work'. (3) The chapter 'Management of Education' deals with management aspects which cover the entire field of education or more than one area of education. ---------------------------------ACRONYMS AND AD BREVIA TIONS Ai: Adult Education AEC Adult Education Centre AIC'IE All India Council for Technical Educ~on ASC Academic Staff College ASCI Administtative Staff College of India BITS Birla Institute of Technology and Science BOAT Boards of Apprenticeship Training BPU B_ureau for Promotion ofUrdu BRAOU Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Open University CABE Centtal Advisory Board of Education CBR Community Based Rehabilitation CBSE Centtal Board of Secondary Education CCRT Centre for Cultural Resources and Training CCE Continuous Comprehensive Evaluation CDC Curriculum Development @entre CDPO Commumty Development Project Officer CEO Chief Education Officer , u CHD Central Hindi Directorate CIEFL Centtal Institute of English and Foreign Languages CIET Central Institute of Educational Technology CIIL Centtal Institute of Indian Languages J CIVE Centtal Institute of Vocational Education CLASS Computer Literacy and Studies in Schools COBSE Council of Boards of Secondary Education COSIST Scheme of Strengthening of Infrastructural Facilities in Science and Technology i CSIR Council of Scientific and Industrial Research ..J CSTT Commission for Scientific and Technological Terminology CTE College of Teacher Education CTV Colour Television Set DAE Directorate of Adult Education OOE&T Director-General Employment and Training DIET District Institute of Education and Training Dl~C District Rehabilitation Centre DRDA District Rural Development Agency DRU District Resource Unit DST Department of Science and Technology DWACRA Development of Women and Children in Rural Areas EB Educationally Backward ECCE Early Childhood Care and Education ECE Early Childhood Education EEO Education Extension Officer EFA Education For All EMRC Educational Media Research Centre AVRC Audio Visual Research Centre GVE Generic Vocational Courses IDI Hearing Hancticap IAMR Institute of Applied Manpower Research lASE Institute of Advanced Saudy in Education ICDS lntegrate.d Chi IJ Development Science ICHR Indian Council of Historical Research ICMR Indian Council of Medical Research ICSSR Indian Council of Social Science Research IDES Intt~gratcd Education for Disabled Children IDS Institute of Development Studies JETE Institute of Electronics and Telecommunications Engine,,:rs IGNOU Indira Gandhi National Open University liM Indian Institute of Management liT Indian Institute of Techno log INFLffiNET Information and Library Network ' IPCL Improved Pace and Content of Leaming m Industrial Training Institutes JCVC Joint Council of Vocational Education JRC Janardhana Reddy Committee JRF Junior Research Fellows JRY Jawahar Rozgar Yojna JSN Jana Shiksha Nilayam KHS Kendriya Hindi Sansthan KOU Kota Open University KVIC Khadi and Village Industries Commission KVK Krishi Vigyan Kendra LM Locomotov Handicap MHRD Ministry of Human Resource Development MIL Modem lndian Languages MIS Management Information System MIL Minimum Levels of Learning MOU Memorandum of Understanding MLA Member of Legislative Assembly MP Member of Parliament MLC Member of Legislative Council NAB National Accreditation Board NCC National Cadet Corps NCERT National Council of Educational Research and Training NCHE National Council of Higher Education ii -------------------------____________________ .....   
NCfE NEC NEO NET NFE NGO NIEPA NIHH NIVH NIMH NIOH NLM NLMA NOS NPE NPERC NSS NTMIS NYK OB PC POA RCCP .RCE R&D REC RPF SABE SAP sc ST SCERT SCHE SCVE SEEUY SH SRC  STEI SIET 'ILC TQM TRYSEM TTTis : \ ':J National Council of Teacher Education North Eastern Council National Evaluation Organisation '· National Eligibility Test Non-Fonnal Education Non-Governmental Organisation National Institute of Educational Planning and Administration AI Javar Junj National Institute of Hearing Handicapped National Institute for the Visually Handicapped National Institute for the Mentally Handicapped National Institute for the Orthopaedically Handicapped National Literacy Mission National Literacy Mission Authority National Open School National Policy on Education National Policy on Education Review Committee National Service Scheme National Technical Manpower Information System Nehru Yuvak Kendra Operation Blackboard Personal Computer Programme of Action Radio-cum-Cassettee Player Regional College of Education Research and Development Regional Engineering College Revised Policy Fonnulations State Advisory Board of Educa,lon Special Assistance Programme Scheduled Cast~ Scheduled Tribe State Council of Educational Resean:h and Training State Council of Higher Education State Council of Vocational Education Self Employment for Educated Unemployed Youth Speech Handicap State Resource Centre Secondary Teacher Education Institute State Institute of Educational Technology Total Literacy Campaign Total Quality Management Training for Rural Youth in Self Employment Technical Teacher Training Institutes iii --------------J-(\XI ,, TV UEE UGC UNDP UNESCO UNICEF UT  VEC VH VRC YCMOU Television l[niversalisation of Elementary Education University Grants Commission United Nations Development Programme United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund Union Territory Village Education Committee Visual Handicap Vocati~ Rehabilitation Centre ~ Y ashwantrao Chavan Maharashtta Open University iv )   
\ INTRODUCfiON -: . -::'· 'diemodifir.¥• . The ReYiaecl Policy to the F.ormuJaliolns Nadoaai PoJkyQD (RPF') :Education. which. 1986 f(Jrlh ;,.'(NP£, 1~:We.e placed in bolb HoUies ofP.arliament on 71h Ma)r, i992. 'lbeile,rpoclificadons wae evolved through the ilme~.process lhrough which the NPE, 1986 'fts 0\'olwd.. Jb J'uly, 1991, a CABB (Cent,ral AdvisOry :ao.d of.Bducllton) Committee Oil Polity (iRC), under the c:lllinnlnlbiPoflhe canprisina _...,.. polilical six other .,.lieS Chief Educalion a&! Minister eight Minislen educllionists, of Andhra belonpng Pradesh, ~ to con and the ·plliamelas llitutecl to' of rev.iew the NPE1 the 1986,1aking implemetP.tion inio c:onsic:leriliO.ihe of the . v_@J.ious ..r ftiPOit other of the relevant Committee development$ for Review since of ·the the.NP£ Policy (NPERC) was.for came mullltd to tbe .Tbe ... conclusiolt JR . . ~·;.ii-~. .while very little in.January of the •• NPE, 992. , (POA) U. 1986 held~ ft'JqUilm needed S-6tb to refQnn be May re ~ 1992, the Propamme of Action considmlbly. abC CABB, the At hisforic its 471h forum meet· for foqing a nalional"coniealus on educalional issues, con . sideredtheJRCreportandfoanulatedtheRPF. ina refenecl Magave . The y to 1992. an the PoA,. to discussion ~ • Is the POA, 1m Minister was 1992) .to on the praent evolved of m RPP Human the~ iri a througll thO~ rmsect Reloun:e . Whilereply POA Sabha. n..-........._ ~·~~ (herelf&a" on121h Session: the same cOnsen . sual process through which daePolicy was reviewect. Twen ty~two task forces were cOnstituted Oil different subject ll'eiS comprising ~ and officials of the Union . and Stile Governments. A Sieeriilg Commiuee was also set up. ~ ~tion of lhe Task Forces ~ the Steering . Committee. il given in the Appendix to Ibis documenL In spite of the  ing Commitree accomplished constraint, the their Taslc work Forces wilh and great the care. St= Tbe draft Pt'Pgramme of Aclion was diSicussed at a Con · ferenceofStateSecretariesandDirectorsofEducalion,held on 3-4 August, 1992. Sui$~011Srec:eivedduring this meet ing menL were Tbe carefully Cenlral considqetl AdvisOry Board and incorporated of Education in the (CABE) docu .met delailed 011 8th cOnsideration. August, 1992 The and valuable endorsed~ suggestions document made after by lhe State Education Minis&ers and educationists were also taken into accouht in fmalizing th~ documenL The Policy review had established that the policy framework the· NPE, 1986 enunciated is robust and can guide the educational development of the country for a loog . time POA to conlinue comer :Likewise,. to many of the strltegies oudfued in be relevant and should be acted upon. There are, however, many exceplions, the best example of 2-881 M/o. HRD/95 proach wbicll is is Jdult a post-POA literacy. inno\tation The Total which Litaacy has Campaign emerged u ap a viable model and has transformed the perceptioo of Univer sal able adult prospecL literacy The from wisdom one of,hopeless of hindsight dream as to well an achiev u the evaJualion of major pro~~ launched aftet·the FOA, llld revisi(ll, .. therecommendalionsofNP'DC The constantendeavourofthe , . 'I./' andJRC Task Forees facilitated and the the " tical Steering and COmmittee action-Oriented. was to make the POA, 1992 more . prac tional The meaning NPE, 1986 to concurrency. bas the distinction Given of that giving Education an opera is a .concurrentsubject.thePOA,1992canbeimplenientedonly if the Unioo and the States/Union Territories (UTs) work togelher in meaingful partnership. The POA, 1992 has to be perceived u a charter for aclion of the nation as a whole requiring a co-operative effort of the Union, States/UTs, the education-community, and the community at large. Given · the ridl divCrsity.of olir continental nation it would be in the funesiofthingsif each State and UTformulateS a StiltePOA · · iogkal tioQ Which sary ssiucture with foimulating to.slress the. is Conclusion P,OA, in.liDe but ooly that .1992 a with what PQA a with projection •. the 1bis is eacbdislrict of p-eSented situational itS process owp of die •. In here. and has direCtion this imperalive edutali~ 10 is context. .bC riot carried with an it as.weU inflexible is varying institu-· neCes 10 as its . : degrees of delail. A certain am~nt of ~exibility is assumed whiCh will help the implementing agencies in tailoring the POA; 1992 to suit their contexts and emerging see~. In the ultimate, resourceS~ management would defme implementalion. In developing this document the resource availability indk:ateci for the 8th Five Year Plan (1992-97) was kept at the back of ~ mind;-but at the same time the ·loog term perspective has not been lo~ sight of. Many ac lions~visagedbythePOA,1992spannotonly.the8thFive Year Plan but also the 9th and even beyond. Phasing has, thelefore, to be left somewhat flexible so that the pace of implementation can match the mobilisation of ieSOW"Ces. The national resolve of raising the outlay on education to 6% of the national income should be translated into prac tice at the earliest possible, As envisaged by the NPE, 1986 and through the modalities it outliDed, the nalion u a whole, should assume responsibility of providing the resource sup port for education. The logical corollary of this proposition is that an ethos of cost-effectiveness and accountability should permeate every part of the education'syStem. To say the least, 'unplanned proliferation of sub-standard institu tions to be driven should by stop budg,e&s here and and now; inaead programmes should s1ress should processes cease and outcomes; efficiency should be rated not by the abUity to consume budget and demand more but by performance and delivery. All this calls for extra-Ordinary attention to the management of education which is often neglected. It is ob vious that the many tasks which the NPE, 1986 and POA, 1992 envisage cannot be performed in a state when even routine tasks like supply of textbooks, conduc\ of tutamina tions and operation of academic calendar leave much .to be desired. Reform of management in its entirety should be the rust and foremOst task of the education community. · While the Union and State Governments will fully shoulder these responsibilities it is people's involvement in the educational reconstruction which will make the real dif ference. The total literacy campaigns have demonstrated that, given the will, and the right strategy and appropriate structures, people's involvement can be elicited on a large scale. 'The management challenge in education lies in creat ing appropriate arrangements for a similar involvement to take on long-standing problems like the Universalisation of Elementary Education (UEE). There is no better way to en . sure accountability· than· an awakened and "demanding" community._ Another important challenge is establishing linkages be tween education and other related services like child care, nutrition and health. As it is, the responsibility for educa tional administration is fragmented in most States, with more than one Education Secretary and several Directors of Education. There is need for greater coordination amongst these multiple agencies and functionaries on the one hand and between Education and other areas ofHRD on the other. Appropriate mechanisms should be developed. Education for Women's Equality is a vital component of the overall strategy of securing equity and *ial justice in education. Paras 4.2 and 4.3 of the National Policy on Education (NPE), 1986 are very strong and forthright state· ments on the interventionist and empowering role of educa tion. What comes out clearly from the implementation of NPE, 1986 ·and its POA, is the need for institutional mechanisms to ensure that gender sensitivity is reflected in tilt? implementation of all educational programmes across the board. It is being increasingly recognised that the problem of UEE is, in essence, the problem of the girl child. It is imperative that participation of girls is enhanced at all vi stages of education, particularly in streams like science, vocational, technical and eommetce education where girls are grossly under-represented. the education system as a whole should be re-oriented to promote women's equality and education. Another facet of th~ ov.erall Strategy of securing equity and social justice in education is the concern fm the educa tional Deeds of SCs/STs, minorities, and the physically and mentally handicapped. Here again it is Decessary for educa tioDdl~ystem to be sensitive to the educational needs of these groups; it should be geared up to promote equalisation of educational opportunities. Tho fcmnulltioni on management outlined in this docu ment cover not only suuctures but also p(ocesses. Many of the structures envisaged like the State Advisory Boards of Education (SABEs), District Boards of Education, Village Educa&ion CtJmmittees (VECS), are participative in ruilure and fatiliua greater coordination between education and support services. The processes envisaged include planning, uaining, and monitoring and. evaluation. Experience since 1987 has established the need for the monitoring arrange ments being strengthened and being supplemented by peri odic impact studies. The formulations in POA, 1992 should be implemented with vigour and determination, with adap tation which may be necessary to suit specific situations. More than ever, there is an increasing awareness about national integration and adherence to certain national values and concerns; obsetvance of secular, scientific and moral values; inculcation of an understandfng of our composite culture, with its rich tu\tel'Sity, of our history, the history of freedom struggle and of the achievements of independent India; creation of an awareness of the importance of protec tion of environment and observance of s~ family nonn: and .stress on commitment of youth to manual work and so cial service. While these aspects have received due atten tion in ihe past, furt!::r reorganisation of the content and process of education on these lines would be a matter of foremost priority. Time is of essence, and unless we act now, we stand in the danger of once again missing the opportunity of educa tional reform, so critical not only for the development of our nation but for our very surviVal.   
1. .. EDUCATION FOR WOMEN'S EQUALITY 1. PREFACE U.l Education for Women's Equality Is a vital com ponent of the overall strategy of ~urin& equity and soeial justic4 on Education in education. (Nn), Para$ 1986 4.2 are and vexy 4.3 of strong the National and forthright Policy statemenb! on the intervening and empowering role of education. Inter alia, they emphasize the provision of spe cial support services and removal of factors which result in discrimination apin$1 women at all levels of education. The POA clearly spells out the actions which need to be taken to improved promote DPQn. education What for is !fOU&ht women's to equality; be done is it to can modify hardly the be contents of the POA wherever appropriate.·What comes out clea,rly ia the need for. will to implement and institutional mechanisms to ensure that gender sensitivity is reflected in the implementation of educational ~mes across the board. Ed~tion for Women's Equality is too important to be left to the individual Commitments or proclivities of per sons in charse. of implementing programmes. It should be incumbent on all actors, agencies and institutions in the field of education at all levels to be gender sensitive and ensure that women have their rightful share in all educational pro1f8111mes and activities. 2. PRESENT SITUATION 1.2.1 According to the 1991 census female literacy rate is 39.42% compared to 63.86% for males. The nPM~r of female illit-erates at 197 miUion is more than male jf ~terates by the 70 male million population even though by 32 the million. female population There are is significant less than rural-urban disparities among women, rural female literacy is that about for every half of 100 urban girls female in class literacy. I in rural A areas, striking there finding are only is 40 in elus V, 18 in class VIII, 9 in class IX and only one in ClB$8 XU -the corresponding figures for urban areas being 82, 62, 32 and 14. If ten to twelve years of general educa tion is the basic requirement for entrance into t...:chnical and professional education, rural girls would therefore stand ex eluded. An overwhelming proportion of vocational, higher and technical educational facilities are located in urban or semi-urban areas. Participation of girls in this sector con tinl.les to be low and gender stereotyped. Similarly, propor tion of women and girls in engineering and agriculture based courses is woefully low. 1.2.2 This is compounded by the fact that the proportion of women teachers in the low literacy States is extremely poor. The percentage of women teachers at the primary and middle schools is 21 'I, and~~ in rural areas and 56% and 57% in urban areas. 1.2.3 It is therefore imperative that the entire educational system is alive to the gender and regional dimensions of . educational disparities. • " 3. POLICY PARAMETERS AND STRATEGIES 1.3.1 In pursuance of NPE the main features of the im plementation strategy will consist of the following : . (i) to gear the entire education system to play a positive interventionist role in the empower ment of women; (ii) to encourage educational institutions to take up active programmes to enhance women's status and further women's development in all sec tors; (iii) to widen women's access to vocational, techni cal and professional education at all levels, breaing gender stereotypes; (iv) to create adynamic management structure that will be able to respond to the challenge posed by this mandate. 4. PLAN OF ACTION 1.4.1 Strategies outlined below deal primarily with opera tional details regarding implementation of the POA : (i) All the Bureaus of the DepartmentofEducation will gender prepare related a concerns concrete action in their plan specific addressing area of work by August, 1993. Relevant nodal institu tions like the UGC, AICTE, ICSSR, ICHR, CBSE, ICAR, ICMR, IAMR, State Boards, Vocational Education Bureaus, etc. will also prepare similar action plans. Part IV, para 4.1 to 4.3 of the NPE and Chapter XII of the POA will form the guiding principles for the action plan. (ii) A monitoring unit will be created in the Plan ning Division of the Department of Education to ensure integration . of gender issues into policies, programmes and schemes. This unit will develop indicators for monitoring im plementation, ensure effective dissemination of information and coordinate action. This will be done by August, 1993. (iii) Similar monitoring units/bureaus will be set up at the State level. (iv) Annual reports of all the bureaus and institu tions will clearly spell out the steps they have liken to enhanoe women's and sirls' access to educaaiOn, ensuriiiJ lbal thec:onrent and prOcai of education is sensitive to sender c:oncems and equal access is assured for science and techili eal educalion at Ill levels. S. EMPOW6RMENTOFWOMEN l..S.1 Education Clll be an effective tool for women's em powerment. the pararneaaS of which are :  enhance self-esteem and self confidence of women:  buildinl a pqsilive image of women by recopiz., ins ~ contribution to the· society, polity lhCI the-economy:  dev~lopinJ ability to think critically:  fosrerins decisioo matins and action &hrouJl. collective processes; ·  enable women 10 make inforn\ed choices in areas like education, employment and health (especial ly reproductive health:  ensurins equal participation in developmental processes: . . . .  vidin informalicn JmowlaA-...li.ttil for pro I ' ........... ·* . economic independence: · ' ·--·  cnhancins ac:cess to lepllileracy and.inforna . lion relatinsto lheir rishts and entitlements iR society wilh a view to enhlnce lbeirpenicipllioa on an eq~ .footina. in allaJaS. I .5.2 The follow in& meaura wDl be liken for ICbieve rnent of the above parame&ciS and the conccmed bureaus and institutians willlepolt on 1J1'011'e5S as stated in para 4.1 above: (i) Every educational institution will take up active Program~ of women's development: (ii) All teachers and insti UCIOI'S wiD be trained II qents of women's empowermenL TraininJ pt'OJI'8JDIDeS will be developed by NCERT, NIEPA. DAE, SRCs, DIETs, SCERTs and tho University System. Innovative uainins prosrammes will be designed wi:h. the assb: aance ~ cancemed orpnizadons and women's poops: (iii) Gender and poverty sensitization_prosrammes wiD be developed for teacha' ed~tors and ad minislralors. An environllleDt will_ be crealeCI w~by .. 1 the sectiOns of the education secear ' . wiD became alive and sensitive 10 the role of education in eUminatins F,nder disparities. (iv) In arder to create a JN11« confidence and 10 2 motivate parenu to send sirls to school, preference will be siven to recruitment of women teachers. (v) 1be common core curriculum is a pocentiatly powerful insaument to promote a positive imap of women. 1be Deparlment of Women's Studiea. NCERT will intensify activities al ready initiated in the area~ clevelopinssender tensitive CUrriculum, removins tex bias from textbooks ind -uainins of uainerslleac:bers. SCERT and the conc:ernoc:l State level boards and institUtiOns will initiate simila' work. (vi} Funds would requile ao be earmarked in all education budsets for such awareness and ad vocacy related activities. . 6. REsEARCH AND WOMEN'S SlUDIES 1.6.1 Women's Studies isa aidcal input to promote bet · tcr underStanclinJ of women's contribution to social proces • within social,.technological and enviromnenlal chanse, tbeir suuglcs and aspirations. conc:eptaa1 obstacles lhat llllblhem •invil,jble• 1n many areas or scientif'ac enquiry. The pqramme ._to investigate and remove structural, ~or. aatiludinal causes of JCDder discrimination. and ..-'empower wolnen to achieve effective panicipatioil in ...  mnadonal or intemadona1 development. The four clilaensions 10 be suppol1ed are : (i) Research to advance the frontiers of tnowlectse, develop human resource~ and podpce~llllfaWiJapursuitof 'theabcMiilns. . (ii) .Tachiqtocha&epreselllallia+sand values of men IRd women toone of c:oacem ror·Jender equality. E:xistiiiJ biases and def'aciencies in cuiric:ulum will be adcli'essed. (iii) Trainins of reachers, decisioa makers, ad minislraiOI'S and planners to enable them 10 play a positive interVentionist role for 1ender equality. (iv) Extension or direct involvement of institutions in women's development activities amons the community. 1.6.2 Special effons wut be made to make the Women's SIUdiel Cadre~ set up in 20 universities and 11 colleJes to become more effective throuab intensive_ uainiDJ of their staff. Eminent insdtulions and well knoWn women's or pnizaliOni will be involved in abe process of revitalizinl aisaina cen~ts ar.d helpina in lhe establishment of Dft'OIWII. 1.6.3 Nelwortin8 between different institutions for re ~b. extension ud information disiemination has   
3 demonstrated ~ crease regionBl decentralized outpui language&~ growth. high ai;ea-spetific of quality cost-effectiveness&$ Such training leaching networks models and curriculum of ~ will intenention. weD be as ini~ted especially potential design, to and for ill in 1.6.4 Foundation course should be designed and intro duce(! for undergraduales with a view 10 promote the objec tives of empowerment of women. This will be done within 'die 8th Plan period. 7. UNIVERSALIZATION OF ELEMENTARY EDUCATION AND ADULT EDUCATION .Edtication 1.7.1 It is (UEE) impossible unless concerted 10 achieve efforts Universal are mide Elementary 10 reach out or"hiwe tUnities 10 the had through girl to child. ttRlp N~-Formal out Girls wiD who be Education cannot provided attend eel~ (NFE). foonal Efforts schools oppor wiJl be ma4e · to design special NFE programmes tcbool and adolesce'nt girls with a view to get ahem the farmill srream or qualify Jor · technical or for vocatioaal back out into of · ? · eduCation. The Open SciKJ91, disaanc:e education systems ·and ocher innovative~ prOgnunmes wiD reachout coaununity to &irisin ~areas ~ drcxts will and be urban encouraged slums. Voluntary in Ibis sector. and Tbe above tasks acquire a greater significance in the • SAARC decade of the girl child. 1.12 ·The ~ girls are doubly cijsadvanaaged by non ·paid avaU-ability bave a to do unpaid relalied of educational wort. with Coordinafodefl'orts,llbeit fuel, facilities foddet, W. :and by .. sibling the work with care other they and · · J)eawlmentBIMinisbies, need 10 ·be made 10 provide the llld caae necesay performanCe. facilities support shouJd Provision services be seen tO as ofsuppm enhance a necessary services their and participation integral and child ad· juncc of UEE · ·. 1,. 7 3 An important consttainini factOr for female educa tion is the lack of women teachers in rur8t 81'f/BS. The 'cent Revised of reachers Policy recruited Formulatians in future postulate would that be women. at least There SO per fore special efforts would ~ made to recruit women teachers and 10 augment teacher-training facilities for ematics women teacheis and are so available that s'cience. adequate iri • different number sub.;cicls, of q~lifi~ including women Math 1.7.:4 Total Literacy Campaigns (J'LCs) being taken up should pay special attention to women in the 15-35 age group as it has been done with very positive impact irl many distticts. NFE should bedov~led to Ti.Cs in order to reach out 10 girls in the 10-~0 age group. 1.7 .5 Programmes for continuing education should be designed to ensure that neo-literates and school going girls have access 10 Ie&ding materials. If necessary, books and . -~ .. magazines should be made available 10 women in their 118m · lets. The medium of radio' will be; utilised 10 sustain,.... en3 thusiasm and motivatiOn. ~ "' 1. 7.6 Efforts shOuld be made to coordinate the different · vocational 5cheme(;·\)odl within the formal system and those initiated by Olrrs. Departments/Ministries. '. 8. WOMEN'S ACCESS TO VOC.A TIONAL, TECHNICAL ANDPROFESSt(JNAt EDUC-9'JON AND Ex'{~!ING AND EMERGENT TECHNOLOGIES ,, 1.8.1 Improvement of~' access ao'technical, vocation al and professional~ requires a national programme to introduce and strengthen Scienceind Mathematics teach ing in all gtfls schools. A special scheme will be designed to meet the shOrtfall of ·Science and Malhernatics teachers I in girls ·schools. Serious efforts/ should be made by the Centre and State planners, cuniculum developen and ad ministtators 10 consciously encouritge participation of girls · in non-traditional and emergent technologies at aD levels. Guidance and counselling for girls should be undertaken as a necessary pre-condition to ~e participation. · 1.8.2 Women's access topical education will be im proved qualitatively and quantitali~ly especially in rural areas. Women's Inslllld Polyteclmks and WOIIlen•s wings iQ general Politechnics and Ins wiD be revamped with a view to diversify disciplines, ttades aDd courses to en courage participation in new and emerging technologies. 1.8.3 Information about~t, banking, enterpteneurial abilities wiD be developed in technical and vocational in stitu-tions. The IIJPRIIticeship scheme wiD be strengthened to increase the CO¥eJ'IIC of women. · 9. MEDIA 1.9.1 The elecCronic,_print and traditional media. wiD be used 10 create a clUii8tc for equal opportunities for women · and girls. It will thus play a;:omplementary and supportive --rolo in awareness generation, dissemination of information ~ commwrlcation. Given the ~ almost aD rural areas are covered by radio, ~ial-e!forts wiD be made to ~tilize this medium to reach out16Women. 10. MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE AT CENTRE AND STAlE LEVEL 1.10.1 Women's cells should be set up forthwith in all Central and State agencie~ c~ed with curriculum development, train-ing and researtli. l.lO.l A Mpnitoring cellwill be setup within the rtanning Bureau of the I>ep&runentofEducation, Ministry of Human Resource Development. Similar units in the states should take responsibility for monitoring and evaluating progress. 1.103 A high levellnter-Minist¢al Committee will be Constituted by the. Department Of Education, MHRD to: (i) reView implementation of POA on a continuing . . basis; (ii) advise the government on policies and programmes related to girls education; ;,··.,. '· ·~ ,. .. 4 (iii) activate planning mechanisms in consultation with each other to ensure provision of esSential support services that will enhance girls. and women • s participation in education . 1.10.4 Similar commiuees will be constituted at abe State level. ·. \ .1..··   
2. EDUCATION OF SCHEDULED CASTES AND SCHEDULED TRIBES AND OTHER BACKWARD SECTIONS   
l. :· PRESENT SI1UATION 2JJ According to 1981 census, the population of Scheduled Castes (SCs) was 10.6 crores and that of Scheduled Tribes (STs) 5.4 crores accounting for 15.75% and7.8%respectivelyofthecountry'spopulation. Thecor responding figures of 1991 census are not yet available. 2.1.2 According to "1981 census, the literacy rates of SC and ST population were 21.38% and 16.40% respectively as against 41.22% of non-SC/ST population. The literacy rates of women for these categories were 10.93, 8.04 and 29.43 percent respectively .. The corresponding figures of 19'91 census are not yet available. The proportion of enrol ment of SC/ST children continues to be much less than their population proportion except in the case of primary educa -tion where the enrolment ratios are comparable to the general enrolmenL But this is ~sibly due to the higher proportion of over-age children amongst these categories. 2.1.3 The drop-out rate among SC/ST students continues to be very high at all levels of education. The drop-out rates for the year 1987-88 amongst'sc, STand general popula tion are given below: Drop-out Rates (1987-88) Classes sc ST General I-V 51.60 65.21 46.97 I-VIII 68.81 80.01 62.29 I-X 81.98 87.62 75.30 2.1.4 The NPE, 1986 was unambiguous about removal of disparities and attainment of equalisation of educational op portunities for SCs, STs and other Backward Sections, spe cially for girls. The POA detailed a number of strategies aimed at accelerating their rate of enrolment 8l)d retention. The NPERC as well as the JRC have reiterilted the need for concerted efforts for bringing about equality of educational opportunity and achievement for SCs, STs and other back ward sections of the soCiety. However, despite the policy imperatives, the implementation of the various schemes has Jtot been commensurate with the goals set up for each scheme. 2.1.5 .A number of Centrally Sponsored Schemes are being continued in the 8th Five Year Plan (1992-97) for SCs, STs and other backward sections. These are (i) Post-matric scholarships; (ii) Grant-in aid to voluntary organisations; (iii) in,.un"'lean Pre-matric ®Cupations; scholarships (iv) for Book children banks; of those (v) Boys' engaged and Girls' Hostels: (vi) Coaching and allied schemes. In addi tion to these, two schemes in the central sector have also programme been approved, for girls viz., belonging (i) special to educational SCs of very development low literacy levels, and (ii) educational complex in low literacy pockets for development of wqmen 's literacy in tribal areas. These programmes are in additiOI) to the special thrust given to the weaker sections in the general programmes for educational development like opening of schools, running ofNon-For mal Education (NFE) centres and.adult education centres, schemes of Operation Blackboard, upgradation of merit of SC/ST students, I reservation-in educational institutions, etc. 2. ELEMENTARYEDUCATION 2.2.1 Taking into account the experience gained in the im plementation of NPE, · 1986 and POA, the follow~ng strategies are proposed: (a) Access and Enrolment 2.2.2 In order to ensure universal access and enrolment of SC children in rural areas, henceforth, in opening primary and upper primary schools priority would be given to the needs of SC habitations and hamlets. As far as possible pre primary section will be an integral part of such schools. 2.2.3 Every Scheduled Tribe habitation will be provided · with a primary school or other suitable institution befae the end of the 8th Five Year Plan in order to ensure universal enrolment and participation. 2.2.4. In tribal areas educational plan will be implemented in an integrated manner. Pre-school education (through Bal wadis), Non-Formal Education, elementary education and · adult education will be organically linked and integrated to ensure achievement of total literacy of the entire population. ThisJ!ttegratedEducationaiComplexwillberesponsiblefor total education within its area serving all children in the age group 3-14 and adults jn the age-group 15 and above. 2.2.5 For SC children access and enrolment will be as sured primarily in the formal school. Where SC children are not able to attend the formal school provision for non-for mal and distance education centres will be made to ensure universal access and enrolmenL 2.2.6 It will be the responsibility of the teachers to or ~anise drives at the beginning of every academic session to enrol all school-age children specially girls belonging to SCs, STs and other backward sections. For this purpose ac tive assistance of voluntary agencies. and. local communities shall tive in be reaching taken. Traditional parents and and folk children media in can remote be vety areas effec to motivate them. "' (b) Participation 2.2.7 Adequate incentives will be provided for the . children of SC, ST anc:t other badcwatd sections in the Conn or Scholarsh~, Uniforms, textbooks. stationery and mid day meals. 2.2.8 All sdlools, NFE centres and pre-school centres in SC/ST habitations will be equipped with necessary andes sential infrastructural facilities in accordance with ·the · nonns laid down for Operation Blackboard and for achiev ing Minimum ~vels of Learning (MIL). 2.2.9 .Operation Blackboard shall cover within a period or two years all schools in tn"baa areas and Harijan. Bastis ir respective of the date on which the school was set up. 2.2.10 The indigent families among SC/ST wlll be given incef)tives to send their children, particularly girls, to schools. (c) Ach~velaeat 2.2.11 Children from tribal communities wlll be ~ught through the mothtltongue in the earlier stages in primary school. ~Teaching/learning ma&erial in the tribal languages wiD be prepared providing for a ttansition. to the regional language by Cla.u m. . 2.2.11 The heme languageofcblldren ofSC/ST may be dif ferent from others. 'I'berd'ore. SlaRCWd teachinglleaming material wm be re-written to make them intelligible to the SC/ST children -especially in areas where the standard lan JWIIC and the learners' dialect are difl'erenL · , 2.2.13 It will be ensured ihat MLL already set-up for primary schools will be achieved, &hal the necessary a&and· ards ci dwe Rs are acquired by aU children in SC/ST com munities. Effective methodologies for measurement of MU. will be implemented. · 3. ADULTEDUCATION 2.3.1 Adult education programmes will bean integral part of educadonal micro-planning in all tn"baa areas. 23.2 Under the total literacy campaign SC and ST popu1atioos will be the major focus for achieving total literacy. Special auention will be paid to adult iUiterate women. 2.33 Adult education programmes for SCsJSTs will es sentiaUy be programme.'l · of empowennenL. Special and relevant eurricula and malerials shall be prepared for this purpose as a crasb pogramme. 23.4 Post-lireracy centJes will be set up in SC/ST areas wt-a"e literacy campaigns have been carried out in order to p[Ovidc facilities for continued literacy for adult neo lifaares specially women. · 6 4. INCENTIVES 'i 2.4.1 Under the scheme of pre-mabie and post·llllb:ic. scholarships. the rates will be linked with the-inclase in the cost ofliving index. 2.4.2 Schot.ships for SC/ST I1Udenls in upper primary (middle) school and onwards will be distributed through bank/post-office. Scholarshi~ will be payable in advance on the fust day of each month. Special proVisions will have to be made to allow minor children to operate bank accounts. 2.43 Coaching, lraining and Jemedial teaching ciasses will be cxpnised for students of SCIST and Olher baCkward sections in order to enhance the scholasdc iehievement of these students. Special coaching for enarance euminations for institutions of higher learning, particularly for profes sional courses to be pro'flided to SCJST students of Classes X and XII. 2.4~4 Residential facilities will be provided for SCJST stu dents peplring for competitive euminalions. 2A.S Additional scholatships wiD be provided for SC/ST girl studeitis ln the secondary and'senior secondary classes. Special coaching and remedial 00unes wiD be organised for SC/ST &irllllldenll. . 2A.6 Merit Scholarship Schemes coVering A Grade stu dents will be impleinemed in all the Stares. . 2.4.7 Boc*s of proven qualky iDclUcting claSSics from In~ dian and foreign langaapa wiD beabridpd. adapted. tJans.o lated and reproduced and made available MIUbsidised ra&es to tllec:hildraa and neo-lilaala inSOST~iies. S. RESERVATIONS 2.5.1 Implementation of reservalion will be moni~ at all levels and failure to adhere to the same wUl be made punishable. 2.5.2 Reservation in rccruianent of ICIIChers from SCIST communilies will be eD$UI'ed in all educational U,stitulions. 2.5.3 In Navodaya Vidyalayas, admissim for SCs and STs are reserved on the basis of either the'national norm of 15'11 and 7 .SCJJ respectively or ci the percentage ci SC and ST populadon in the dislrict, whichever is high«. This prin ciple will be considered for adaptation by State Govern ments in OCher educational instilutions, whcmer feasible, the aifaioo of reservation being the national pen;enrages of IS and 7 1!1. or the State percentages.ci.SC and ST or the district percentages of SC and ST. whichever is higher. 2.5.4 1broUgh Iii appropriate scheme facilities will be provided to SCJST chiJdml for stullyina in teputtd private educational institutions of high quality. Resenation will be ·provided tor SCISTchDdren in schools which receive grant in-aid. ' .. . : 6. TEACHERS AND THEIR 1RAINING 2.6.1 Where· teachers are not available in schools located· in.SC/ST localities, crash programmes for giving suitable tiaining to eligible persons from SCs/STs will be started. The eligible amongst them will be appointed as teachers in the schools. 2.6.2' Specified teacher training institutions such as DIETs will be identiti~ for training of SC/ST teachers on a large scale: 2.6.3 In order to encourage SC/ST students to become I . teachers special courses integrating secondary, senior secondary and professional training wit be devised. This will encourage such candidates to opt for the teaching profession from an early stage and get adequate ttaining as teacher. 2.6.4 Wherever possible husband-wife teams will be posted as teachers in tribal areas. This will ensme high par ticipation by such teachers in school education. 7. ADDITIONAL MEASURES 2.7.1 A chain of pace-setting institutions from primary to higher secondary will be established in areas of SC/ST con centration for providing quality education to talented learners as well as for upgrading the achievement levels of comparatively slow learners in these communities. · 2.7.2 Education in tribal areas should be linked with out door activities. Many tribal children excel in sports, games and other out-door activities. Such talent must be identified and nurtured. Adequate coaching will be provided at early stages so that these talented ·sportsmen and women can par ticipate in sporting activities and competitions. Scholarships will be provided for such students paying special attention to their dietary requirements. 2.7.3 There is need for improvement in the standards of hostels for SC/ST students. Special attention has to be paid to the nutritional need of the students. As far as possible hos tels should be managed by teachers. Hostels for SC girls should be constructed in or around the vicinity of the schooVcollege where the girls are enrolled and adequate security measures should be provided. Hostels should preferably be run by Non-Governmental Organisa tions{NGOs). 2. 7.4 There is need to incorporate in the school curriculum philosophy of Dr. Ambedkar which emphasised an untiring effort to alleviate the educational standards of SC/ST per sons, an inculcation of an understanding among teachers and students ab01r~ the richness of the culture of SC/ST and of their contribution to culture and economy. 3-881 M/o. HRD/95 7 8. OTHER EDUCATI6NALL Y BACKWARD · SECTIONS 2.8.1 Special efforts will be made to improve the educa ~ infrastructme in remote and inaccessible areas, bor der areas, islands and hilly and desert areas and areas of concentration of educationally backward sections. Measures will also be taken to ensure that incentives in the form of scholarships, uniforms, books, stationery. etc. reach the clientele groups. 9. MONITbRING 2.9 .1 In addition to the monitoring by the existing scheme; monitoring of education in SC/ST areas will be entrusted to the local community/village education committee with ade quate representation of-SC/ST members specially women. The local community will take the total responSibility of planning the educational facilities in SC/ST areas. 2.9.2 In most of the States and at the Centre the incentive programmes like scholarships, mid-day meals, free uniforms, etc. and setting up of hostels and Ashram Schools for SC/ST are being implemented by the Welf~ Depart ments, while the Departments ofEducation run programmes of setting up of schools, appointment of teachers, prepara tion of textbooks, curriculum, etc. which cater to SC/ST stu dents as a part of the general programmes of the Education Departments. It would, therefore, be appropriate that the monitoring is done by the respective departments ·im plementing the programmes. The Joint Monitoring System developed for this purpose by the Ministry of Human Resource Development, Ministry of Welfare and Planning Commission will be taken up earnesdy. 2.9.3 ·In some States, educational institutions for Scheduled Tribes are being run by agencies other than the Education DepartmenL It is better that-these are mana,ged by Depart ment of Education. 10. EVALUATION OF SCHEMES 2.10.1 A number of evaluation studies have been con ducted on the implementation of Centtally Sponsored Schemes as well as schemes of the State Governments. For example, in the recent past, the post-matric scholarship scheme has been reviewed by the Department of Personnel and by NIEP A. Pre-matric scholarship schemes of the State Governments have been evaluated by NCERT. The Girls' Hostel scheme was reviewed by three research organisa tions uMer the scheme of evaluation of the Department of Education. Many studies have also been conducted under the programmes of assistance of Ministry of Welfare, NIEPJ\, NCERT, Tribal Research Institutes, etc. But there does not seem to be a proper follow up of the reports. 2.10.2 What is needed is a systematic documentation and utilisation of the findings of the reports for taking corrective action. 8 ' '   
, ' 3. MINORITIES' EDUCATION 1. PRESENT SI1UATION 3.1.1 ~Articles 29 and 30 of the Constitution of India juarantec the rights of minorities to conserve the language. script al language. insdtutions and culture So far of ·their as and minorities to choice establish whether are and concerned administer based on the education religion following or constitutional gauranree. have been provided which are in addition m of the to Constitution Articles relating : . to Fundamental Rights in part (i) Article 29. Protection of interests of minorities. 29(1) ritory Any section of India of or the any citizens part thereof residing llaving in the a dis ter have tinct languap, the right~ to script conserve or culture the same. of its own shall 29(2) No citizen shall be· denied a4mission into any educational institution maintained by the State or only receiving of religion, aid out race. of c8ste, State language funds on or grounds any of them. (ii) Articlo 30. Right of Minorities to establish and ldminister educational institutions. 30(1) All minorities, whether based on religion or lan guage, shall have the right to establish and ad minister educational institutions of dtei t'Choice. 30(1A) In making any law providing for d:.:. compul sory acquisition of any property of an educa tional institution established and administered by shall a minority, ensure that referred the amount to in clause fixed (1 by ). or the deter State mined such property under such is such law as for would the acquisition not restrict of or · abrogate the right guaranteed under that clause. 30(2) The State shall not, in granting aid to education al institutions, discriminate against any educa tional institution on the ground that it is under the management of minority, whether based on religion or language. (iii) Article 3SOA. Facilities for instruction in mother-tongue at primary stage. ·· .llahall authority be wilhln die endeavour of every State and of every local tho State to provide adequate facilities for . oduoadon poupa; iniii'UCdan lftd to In· the children &he President molher-tongue belonging may issue at to such the linguistic primary directions minority stage to any of S• IS he considers necessary or propez for securing the provision of such facilities. 3.1.2 The implementation of the above guararitees has been uneven although the various Conferences ofEducation Ministers, Government of India Memorandum of 1956 as also the Statement on Languages in 19S8 etc., have been laying emphasis on the special treatment to linguistic minorities. Efforts should be made to safeguard these con stitutional guarantees more vigorously. 3.1.3 According to 1981 Census, the religious minorities .constitute about17 .4% of the population of which Muslims are 11.4%, Christians 2.4%, Sikhs 2%, Buddhists 0.7% and Jains O.S%. The High Power Panel on minorities, SC/ST and other weaker sections, appointed by Ministry of Home Af fairs and headed by Dr. Gopal Singh has identified Muslims and Neo-Buddhists as edu~tionally baclc;.ward at national level. Subsequently, the Government have extended to nco Buddhists all the benefits which are available to Scheduled Castes. which are The educationally State Governments backward may a1 the identify State level. other Special groups efforts need to be taken to bring the educ8tionally backward minorities on par with the rest of the society and to make them participate fully in the national developmental ac tivities. The census .data of 1991 in respect of minorities is not yet available. . 3.1.4 The National Policy on Education (NPE) 1986states the following regarding education of minorities vide pam 4.8 of the document: "Some minority groups are education ally deprived or backward. Greater attention will be paid to the education of these groups in the interest of equality and social justice. This will naturally include the constitutional own guanrantees ed&&eational given institutions, to them to establish and protection and administer to their their tan . guages · and culture. Simultaneously, objectivity will be reflected in the preparation of text books and in all school activities, and all possible measures will be taken to promote an integration based on appreciation of common national goals and ideals, in conformity with ·the core curriculum." This has been reiterated in the Revised Policy Formulations. 2. IS-POINT PROGRAMME FOR THE WELFARE OFMINORmes 3.2.1 Former Prime Minister Smt. Iitdira Gandhiissued a IS-Point Directive on welfare of minoriP.es to the Central and State Governments in May, 1983. PointNos.ll and 12 concern education of minorities. Point No.·ll: In many areas recruitment is done through competitive examinations. Often minority groups are handicapped in taking advantage of the educational system to eom~te on equal terms in such examinations. To help   
10   
them to overcome these handicaps, steps should be taken to encourage the starting of coaching classes in minority educational in stitutions to train persons to compete suc cessfully in these examinations. Point No.12: The acquisition of technical skills by those minorities who are today lagging behind would also help in national development. Arrangements should be made to set up ms and Polytechnics by Government or private agencies in predominantly minority areas to encourage admission in such institutions of adequate number of persons belonging to these areas. 3. ON-GOING PROGRAMMES FOR MINORITIES' EDUCATION (i) Scheme or Coaching Classes for Competetive Ex· aminations 3.3.1 The University Grants Commission introduced a Coaching Scheme in 1984 to prepare students belonging to educationally backward minorities to enable them to com pete in various competitive examinations for recruitment in · services and for admission to professional courses includ ing Engineering, Medical etc. 3.3.2 The U.G.C. is currently implementing the scheme in 20 Universities and 33 colleges. Besides these, two Regional Resource Centres, one each at Calicutand Aligarh Muslim University, have been set up with the objective of preparing teaching and learning materials and also for con . ducting orientation programmes for the functionaries of the Coaching Centres. So far, during the period 1984-90,24,000 candidates have availed of the facility of Coaching Classes. UGC has incurred a lOt.al expenditure ofRs.140.00 lakhs on the implemntation of the scheme. The number of successful candidates is approximately 1,900. 3.3.3 A Standing Committee of UGC reviewed the scheme and on the basis of its recoq~mendations the scheme was revised in 1988. The Standing Committee has been making periodic visits to the centres and has suggested fur accepted ther changes to carry to im_provetfiequatity out tltese changes. of This the scheme. needs to UGC be pur has sued. 3.3.4 Ministry of Welfare had launched during 1990-91, a scheme of pre-examination coaching/training to prepare candidates belonging to educationally and economically backward minority communities for various competititve examinations/professional courses/entrance examinations through reputed minority voluntary organisations. 36 Pre examination coaching/training centres were sanctioned till March, 1991. 3.3.5 The Planning Commission has agreed to include a scheme of pre-examination coaching for weaker sections based on economic criteria under the 8th Five Year Plan. The modalities are being worked out by the Ministry ofWel fare. (ii) Community Polytechnics in Minority Concentra· tion Areas 3.3.6 The scheme of Community Polytechnics was in itiated in 1978-79 with a view to ensuring for the rural society a fair share of benefits from the investments in tech nical education system. The major areas of activities of Community Polytechnics are socio-economic surveys, training programmes for providing skills to unemployed persons for self/wage employment, organising technical services in villages etc. 3.3.7 As a part of implementation of the 15 Point Programme, ten polytechnics were selected dQring 1984-85 in munity minority polytechnics. concentration At present, areas for all upgrading the 41 minority them as com Con centration districts listed in POA~l9~ have been covered by Community Polytechnics or their Extension Centres. (iii) Training programmes for principals/managers/ teachers in minority managed schools. 3.3.8 NCERT has been organising seminars and training programmes for principals/teachers of minority managed schools. The programmes include seminar cum workshop for principals and managerS, and training programmes fQr teachers from minority managed institutions in subjectareas of English, Science, Mathematics, V ocationalisation of education and Educational Evaluation. 'Such training ~. programmes are also being organised by the Regional Resource Centres. About 1400 Princq,als and teachers have been trained so far. (iv) Guidelines for. recognition of Minority Managed Institutions 3.3.9 The Union Department of Education have prepared policy norms and principles for recognition of educational institutions as minority managed institutions and these have been circulated to State Governments for enabling them to prepare detailed guidelines in tlte matter. However, the response from State Governments has not been encourag ing. These guidelines need to be vigorously pursued and ef fectively monitored. (v) Review of Text-Books from the Stand-Point ofNa.. tional Integration 3.3.10 The programme of review of text books from the point of view of providing communal harmony, secularism and national integration is being implemented jointly by the NCERT and State Governments. NCERT takes up review .. ... PONSTRATEGIE$ OF IMPLEMENTATION 3.4.1 .In school education and adult education sectors, areas of concentration of educationally backward minorities tO be taken care of by an Area ~ch with Bl9<=k/Tehsil as a unit where specially designed programmes, would be implemented to ensure accelerated progress.(Action: Deptt of Education -Centre and States/UTs). 3.4.2 Suitable Centlally Sponsored/ Central Schemes should be formulated in the 8th Five. Year Plan for im plementing the strategies for the development of education ally backward minorities. (Action : Deptt. of Education, Ministry of HRD and Planning Commission). 3.4.3 A revised list of minority concentration districts and blocks/l'ehsils should be prepared by the Ministry of Wel fare taking into account all relevant facts. Schemes for the development of the Minorities should be designed for such districts and tehsils/blocks (Action : Ministty of Welfare; Deptt. of Education, Ministry ofHRD). 3.4.4· Non Formal Education equivalent to primary schooling to be adequately provided in areas of concentra tion of educationally backward minori~es. The Scheme of Non Formal Education needs to be reviewed and strengthened accordingly. This is necessary to reduce the drop-out rate. (Action : Deptt. of Education Centte and States/UTs). 3.4.5 A time-bound crash programme of school improve ment with an in-built mechanism for covering minority con centtation areas with the on-going programmes of Opera tion Blackboard, Non-formal Education and District In stitute of Education and Training to be implemented on priority basis. (Action : Deptt. of Education, Centre and States/UTs). 3.4.6 Remedial coaching schemes for SC/ST students to be extended to students belonging to educationally back ward minorities also. Remedial coaching should also in clude enrichment classes for .the relatively better students. (Action: Deptt ofEducation/States/UTs.). 3.4.7 In the higher education sector, educational trusts, foundations and non-Governmental organisations to be sup ported and strengthened. to cater to the educational~ of· educationally backward minorities. (Action : UGC/State GovtsJUTs). 3.4.8 In areas where there is concentration of~e· educa tionally backward minorities, girls hostels to be constructed in schools and colleges on a priority basis. (Action : Deptt. of Education, Centre/States, Ministry. of Welfare and. U.G.C.). 3.4.9 Studies and· surveys to be commissioned on selec tive basis by Research organistions, Universities and other Central add State Agencies. (Action: Deptt. of Education Centre and States/UTs, Ministry of Welfare, NCERT, U.G.C., Plannil}g Commission, ICSSR). 3.4.10 The safeguards guaranteed in the Constitution to lin .. guistic and religidus minorities in respect of education at the primary and secondary stages to ·be effectively imp~ mented. (Action : Deptt. of Education  Centre and States/UTs). • · 3.4.11 A centrally sponsored/central scheme to be launched in areas of minority concentration to ensure the availability of Urdu knowing teachers in schools. Facilities for instruction through the medium of Urdu at the primary stage to be implemented effectively. Where the situation warrants on the basis of existing formula, the Urdu medium sections to be opened in the existing secondary schools. Urdu knowing teachers to be appointed for students offer ing Urdu as a medium. The number of the students belong ing tO educationally backward minority should be the criterion for the appointment' of Urdu teachers in each class/school. and alsO for starting Urdu medium schools and Urdu as subject at different classes in existing schools. State Governments shall ensure that Urdu TextboOks are made available to the school students on time alonpith textbooks in English/Hindi. (Action : Deptt of Education -Centre and States/UTs ). • 3.4.12 (a) A Centr8Ily sponsored/Central scheme for the introduction of Science, Mathematics, English and Hindi . etc., in traditional institutions to be formulated by the Department 9f Education and to be adopted by such in .• of Text-B!".oks of State Governments on sample basis. A Steering Committee has been set up at national level to make this programme a regular feature. A meeting of the Nation al Steering Committee was organised at International In stitute of Dravidian Linguistics, Trivandrum (Kerala) on ... 19-20 April, 1991 to consider the report of the work done and formulate its recommendations. A workshop to evaluate History and Language text-book of West Bengal, Assam, Manipur and Tripura was held at North Bengal University from 13th to 16th March, 1992. (vi) Programmes identified for State Governments 3.3.11 Tire Programme of Action 1986listed a number of other programmes to be taken up by the State Governments for the upliftment of educationally backward minorities. However, most of them have not been taken up because of paucity of funds. . · (vh")Monitoring 3.3.12 A quarterly monitoring report on action taken on programmes envisaged under POA is submitted to Ministty of Welfare. The quarterly report, however, are not regular ly submitted by the State Governments. 4. REVISIONS SUGGESJF.D IN TIIE EXISTING PONSTRATEGIE$ OF IMPLEMENTATION 3.4.1 .In school education and adult education sectors, areas of concentration of educationally backward minorities tO be taken care of by an Area ~ch with Bl9<=k/Tehsil as a unit where specially designed programmes, would be implemented to ensure accelerated progress.(Action: Deptt of Education -Centre and States/UTs). 3.4.2 Suitable Centlally Sponsored/ Central Schemes should be formulated in the 8th Five. Year Plan for im plementing the strategies for the development of education ally backward minorities. (Action : Deptt. of Education, Ministry of HRD and Planning Commission). 3.4.3 A revised list of minority concentration districts and blocks/l'ehsils should be prepared by the Ministry of Wel fare taking into account all relevant facts. Schemes for the development of the Minorities should be designed for such districts and tehsils/blocks (Action : Ministty of Welfare; Deptt. of Education, Ministry ofHRD). 3.4.4· Non Formal Education equivalent to primary schooling to be adequately provided in areas of concentra tion of educationally backward minori~es. The Scheme of Non Formal Education needs to be reviewed and strengthened accordingly. This is necessary to reduce the drop-out rate. (Action : Deptt. of Education Centte and States/UTs). 3.4.5 A time-bound crash programme of school improve ment with an in-built mechanism for covering minority con 11 centtation areas with the on-going programmes of Opera tion Blackboard, Non-formal Education and District In stitute of Education and Training to be implemented on priority basis. (Action : Deptt. of Education, Centre and States/UTs). 3.4.6 Remedial coaching schemes for SC/ST students to be extended to students belonging to educationally back ward minorities also. Remedial coaching should also in clude enrichment classes for .the relatively better students. (Action: Deptt ofEducation/States/UTs.). 3.4.7 In the higher education sector, educational trusts, foundations and non-Governmental organisations to be sup ported and strengthened. to cater to the educational~ of· educationally backward minorities. (Action : UGC/State GovtsJUTs). 3.4.8 In areas where there is concentration of~e· educa tionally backward minorities, girls hostels to be constructed in schools and colleges on a priority basis. (Action : Deptt. of Education, Centre/States, Ministry. of Welfare and. U.G.C.). 3.4.9 Studies and· surveys to be commissioned on selec tive basis by Research organistions, Universities and other Central add State Agencies. (Action: Deptt. of Education Centre and States/UTs, Ministry of Welfare, NCERT, U.G.C., Plannil}g Commission, ICSSR). 3.4.10 The safeguards guaranteed in the Constitution to lin .. guistic and religidus minorities in respect of education at the primary and secondary stages to ·be effectively imp~ mented. (Action : Deptt. of Education  Centre and States/UTs). • · 3.4.11 A centrally sponsored/central scheme to be launched in areas of minority concentration to ensure the availability of Urdu knowing teachers in schools. Facilities for instruction through the medium of Urdu at the primary stage to be implemented effectively. Where the situation warrants on the basis of existing formula, the Urdu medium sections to be opened in the existing secondary schools. Urdu knowing teachers to be appointed for students offer ing Urdu as a medium. The number of the students belong ing tO educationally backward minority should be the criterion for the appointment' of Urdu teachers in each class/school. and alsO for starting Urdu medium schools and Urdu as subject at different classes in existing schools. State Governments shall ensure that Urdu TextboOks are made available to the school students on time alonpith textbooks in English/Hindi. (Action : Deptt of Education -Centre and States/UTs ). • 3.4.12 (a) A Centr8Ily sponsored/Central scheme for the introduction of Science, Mathematics, English and Hindi . etc., in traditional institutions to be formulated by the Department 9f Education and to be adopted by such in centtation areas with the on-going programmes of Opera tion Blackboard, Non-formal Education and District In stitute of Education and Training to be implemented on priority basis. (Action : Deptt. of Education, Centre and States/UTs). 3.4.6 Remedial coaching schemes for SC/ST students to be extended to students belonging to educationally back ward minorities also. Remedial coaching should also in clude enrichment classes for .the relatively better students. (Action: Deptt ofEducation/States/UTs.). 3.4.7 In the higher education sector, educational trusts, foundations and non-Governmental organisations to be sup ported and strengthened. to cater to the educational~ of· educationally backward minorities. (Action : UGC/State GovtsJUTs). 3.4.8 In areas where there is concentration of~e· educa tionally backward minorities, girls hostels to be constructed in schools and colleges on a priority basis. (Action : Deptt. of Education, Centre/States, Ministry. of Welfare and. U.G.C.). 3.4.9 Studies and· surveys to be commissioned on selec tive basis by Research organistions, Universities and other Central add State Agencies. (Action: Deptt. of Education Centre and States/UTs, Ministry of Welfare, NCERT, U.G.C., Plannil}g Commission, ICSSR). 3.4.10 The safeguards guaranteed in the Constitution to lin .. guistic and religidus minorities in respect of education at the primary and secondary stages to ·be effectively imp~ mented. (Action : Deptt. of Education  Centre and States/UTs). • · 3.4.11 A centrally sponsored/central scheme to be launched in areas of minority concentration to ensure the availability of Urdu knowing teachers in schools. Facilities for instruction through the medium of Urdu at the primary stage to be implemented effectively. Where the situation warrants on the basis of existing formula, the Urdu medium sections to be opened in the existing secondary schools. Urdu knowing teachers to be appointed for students offer ing Urdu as a medium. The number of the students belong ing tO educationally backward minority should be the criterion for the appointment' of Urdu teachers in each class/school. and alsO for starting Urdu medium schools and Urdu as subject at different classes in existing schools. State Governments shall ensure that Urdu TextboOks are made available to the school students on time alonpith textbooks in English/Hindi. (Action : Deptt of Education -Centre and States/UTs ). • 3.4.12 (a) A Centr8Ily sponsored/Central scheme for the introduction of Science, Mathematics, English and Hindi . etc., in traditional institutions to be formulated by the Department 9f Education and to be adopted by such in centtation areas with the on-going programmes of Opera tion Blackboard, Non-formal Education and District In stitute of Education and Training to be implemented on priority basis. (Action : Deptt. of Education, Centre and States/UTs). 3.4.6 Remedial coaching schemes for SC/ST students to be extended to students belonging to educationally back ward minorities also. Remedial coaching should also in clude enrichment classes for .the relatively better students. (Action: Deptt ofEducation/States/UTs.). 3.4.7 In the higher education sector, educational trusts, foundations and non-Governmental organisations to be sup ported and strengthened. to cater to the educational~ of· educationally backward minorities. (Action : UGC/State GovtsJUTs). 3.4.8 In areas where there is concentration of~e· educa tionally backward minorities, girls hostels to be constructed in schools and colleges on a priority basis. (Action : Deptt. of Education, Centre/States, Ministry. of Welfare and. U.G.C.). 3.4.9 Studies and· surveys to be commissioned on selec tive basis by Research organistions, Universities and other Central add State Agencies. (Action: Deptt. of Education Centre and States/UTs, Ministry of Welfare, NCERT, U.G.C., Plannil}g Commission, ICSSR). 3.4.10 The safeguards guaranteed in the Constitution to lin .. guistic and religidus minorities in respect of education at the primary and secondary stages to ·be effectively imp~ mented. (Action : Deptt. of Education  Centre and States/UTs). • · 3.4.11 A centrally sponsored/central scheme to be launched in areas of minority concentration to ensure the availability of Urdu knowing teachers in schools. Facilities for instruction through the medium of Urdu at the primary stage to be implemented effectively. Where the situation warrants on the basis of existing formula, the Urdu medium sections to be opened in the existing secondary schools. Urdu knowing teachers to be appointed for students offer ing Urdu as a medium. The number of the students belong ing tO educationally backward minority should be the criterion for the appointment' of Urdu teachers in each class/school. and alsO for starting Urdu medium schools and Urdu as subject at different classes in existing schools. State Governments shall ensure that Urdu TextboOks are made available to the school students on time alonpith textbooks in English/Hindi. (Action : Deptt of Education -Centre and States/UTs ). • 3.4.12 (a) A Centr8Ily sponsored/Central scheme for the introduction of Science, Mathematics, English and Hindi . etc., in traditional institutions to be formulated by the Department 9f Education and to be adopted by such in   
.sti~ions purely on voluntary basis· (Action : Deptt. of Education, Ministry of HRD). (b) The State Govts would be encouraged to estab liSh Madrasa Boards to look after the education of the minorities. Effective administration of these bOJu'ds to be en swid through adequate staff support. (Action : Stajes/UTs. ) .. 3.4.13 Educational programmes with a vocational bias ·to be introduced in th~ educational institutions in areas of con centration of· educationally backward minorities on a priorit}' basis. Training programme in crafts in which there. are inherited skills among educatio~lly backward minorities to be organised through craft training institutes. Efforts to be made to locate such craft training institutes in area of concentration of educationally backward, minorities. Where these institutes are available, in such areas, they are to be upgraded on a selective basis as advanced craft train ing centres st> that the inherited skills of the educationally backward minorities become more productive. ~s· children to bC given preference in admissions in ITis. (Ac ~on: MiriisrriesofHRD,Labour, TextilesandStateGovts.). 3.4.14 The coaching scheme ofUGC to. be revamped and expanded to cover more minority concentration areas. Wherever necessary, new CQ8ching centers to be opened not only in these areas but also in IIQJl~mmority concentration districts for remedial· and enricllrnent-coaching, where suitable ~get group and facilities are available i~a.eolleges and Universities. The ·existing scheme of the Mtnistry of Welfare for providing pre-examination coatfiing for minorities through reputed voluntary organisations to be strengthened and extended to provide remedial coaching~ The Ministry of Wellare will have to take into consideration the invqlvemem of non-Governmental organisations known for theiYnterest in educational development of minorities. UGC -will be exploring possibilities for adopting their scheme for coaching through reputed private institutions for recruitment to the public services. (Action : Ministries of HRD and Welfare and U.G.C.). 3.4.15 A Centrally Sponsored/Central Scheme for appoint ment of language teachers, funded by Government of India, will be launched in the Eighth Five Year Plan. (Action: Ministry ofHRD and Planning Commission). 3.4.16 The alarming rate of drop-out among the minority students to be checked by specially designed measures. In centives to be given to poor minority students in the shape of fre.eships, stipends and uniforms. "They are also to be givenpre-matric and post-matric scholarships by extending the scholarship schemes of SC/ST students. (Action: Min istries of Welfare and HRD). 3.4.17 Voluntary Organisations, Federations and Associa tiQnS of Minority-managed institutions to be encouraged and actively associated with the functioning of minorities education. (Action : State Govts./UTs). 12 3.4.18 Special monitoring machinery must be set up both at the centre and States. The Monitoring Committees shOQld be headed by eminent public persons and have repre sentatives of the community, Voluntary Agencies and the coa:t~erned Govt. agencies. (Action : Deptt. of Education : Centre and States,/UTs). · 3.4.19 Scheme for Scholarships for weaker sections on merit-cum-means basis, with in-built system of placement in good institutions; fee exemption/fee LOncession for ar· tisans and other weaker sections; such help could be routed through Voluntary Societies of all India repute. (Action : Deptt. of Education, Ministry ofHRD; Ministry of Welfare: States/UTs.). 3.4.20 Scheme for encouraging setting up of Libraries, Reading Rooms etc. in minority concentration areas; projects in a few blocks on an experimental dertaken by State Governments which will basis provide to be Ide un quare fmances for the Plli])OSC· ·(Action : States/UTs~). 3.4.21 ·A suitable incentiv~ scheme to be devised tO en . courage States achieving the targets in respect of minorities education. (Action : Ministry of HRD). · 3.4.22 Arrangements ~~r appointment ' of regional language teachers in Urdu medium schqols may be made on a priority basis. (Action : States/UTs). 3.4.23 Voluntary Organisations should be encouraged to set ward up minorities. ITis in areas Where of roncentration required, suitable of educationally f~ M.ould back be · provided. (Action: Ministry of Labour, StatesiUTs). 5. PHASING OF TARGETS, STRATEGIES ENVISAGED AND PRIORITY MEASUREs 3.5.1 Short term measures include: (i) Community Imparting of Polytechnics Technical skills set up through in the areas the 41 of pre-dominant minority concentration. 1bere are many areas in which Community Polytech· nic programmes have not borne the desired result Corrective measures need to taken and vigorously implemented. Due publicity and in centives, should be provided. (Action: Deptt. of Education Centre/States). (ii) University Grant Commission's Scheme of giving assistance to Universities/Colleges for coaching classes for students belonging to educationally backward minorities to· be revamped and expended to cover more minority .. • concentration areas. Wherever necessary, new ... ~ ~ coaching centres to be opend includin$~ · · (iii) minority Programme concentration of_§yaluatron areas. 'of (AcliGtt'!'OGC) *&-boots from ~-s,~nd point of nationallntepadon unct.'· • taken by NCERT and State Governments to be taken up more systematically for speedy and ef fective implementation of this programme. (Action : NCERT/ SCERTs) (iv) Orintation programmes fo'r prin cipals/managers and training programmes for reachers of minority educational instituticms taken up by NCERTINIEPA to be intensified (Action: NCERT/NIEP A). (v) A crash programme of School Improvement consisting of Elementary Education, Non-For· mal Education and Adult Education to be im· plemented on priority basis in minority concentration areas. (Action : Deptt. of Educa tion, M/0 HRD). (vi) The scheme of Resource Centres will be ex tended for providing training and guidance to minority educational institutions situated near these centres. (Action: NCERT, U.G.C.). (vii) A proper monitoring machinery must be set up at the Centre and States. The Monitoring Com mittees should be constituted under the Chair manship of eminent publicmen of the community and well-versed with the problems of minorities. The Committee at the Centre should have all India representation. It should include eminent persons of the community, of fJCers from Education Department and the Min isary of Welfare of the rank of Joint Secretary, Members ofParliament, Vice-Chancellors, rep resentatives of voluntary organisations of repute and a representative from Anjuman Taraqqi-Urdu-i-Hind. The St2te Committee will submit quarterly reports to the Central Monitoring Committee. Monitoring proforma for the purpose will be carefully designed. State Governments should be requested to form such committees in their respective States on the same pattern with immed'~ate effect. They may also be requested to form District Committees. (Action : Deptt. of Education  Centre and States). . (viii) Arrangements for appointment of regional lan guage reachers in Urdu medium schools in States may be made on priority basis. (Action: States/UTs.). (ix) There are complaints of standards of education being lowered down in some institutions run by educationally backward minorities. Similarly there are many allegations regarding appoint ment of reachers and admissions in engineering, medical and other professional colleges. There 13 are also complaints about the general manage ment ofinstitutions at all levels from primary schools to universities. It is the crying need of the hour that an awaken ing should be created among th~Muslims them selves to run and manage their i~Stituti~s with academic excellence on the lines of the I.nstitute of Mass Communication, Jainia Millia Islamia. To achieve this, Government of India should extend generous fmancial grant to such institu tions and also provide total protection to Minority Institutions under Article 29 & 30 of the Constitution. The monitoring committees at State and Central level should be charged with the task of C"nsuring improvement of standards in minority managed institu~ons. (Action : Deptt. of Education; Ministry ofHRD,Ministry of Welfare, States/UTs). (x} Women's Community PolyteChnics should be set up in minority concentration areas on priority basis. (Action : Deptt. of Education  Centre and States/UTs}. (xi) Implementation of Guidelines for Recognition · of Minority managed ediJcational institutions : a) Clear guidelines for reeognition and for timely disposal of applications. ~ch State Government to formulate its recognition policy and giving wide publicity to this. (Ac tion : Deptt. of Education CentraVState Governments). b) Effective monitoring arrangements should be made to see the proper implementation of the guidelines. (Action : Deptt. of Education Central/State Governments). c) State Governments should fix a time limit for processing applications for recognition. There should be a maximum period of three months fixed for disposal from the date of receipt of application. (Action: States/UTs). d) The State Governments may grant automatic recognition to schools of ·minorities upto Class V. (Action : States/UTs). (xii) Special attention should be paid to the minority concentration areas in locating schools so that minority children have access in matters of ad mission. The Ministry of Welfare will prepare a revised list of /minority concentration Blockslfehsils (Action : Ministry of Welfare, Deptt. of I;ducation  Centre and States/UTs). (xiii) Urdu teachers should be aJlll)inted in all the Kendriya Vidyalayas and Navodaya of Minority managed ediJcational institutions : a) Clear guidelines for reeognition and for timely disposal of applications. ~ch State Government to formulate its recognition policy and giving wide publicity to this. (Ac tion : Deptt. of Education CentraVState Governments). b) Effective monitoring arrangements should be made to see the proper implementation of the guidelines. (Action : Deptt. of Education Central/State Governments). c) State Governments should fix a time limit for processing applications for recognition. There should be a maximum period of three months fixed for disposal from the date of receipt of application. (Action: States/UTs). d) The State Governments may grant automatic recognition to schools of ·minorities upto Class V. (Action : States/UTs). (xii) Special attention should be paid to the minority concentration areas in locating schools so that minority children have access in matters of ad mission. The Ministry of Welfare will prepare a revised list of /minority concentration Blockslfehsils (Action : Ministry of Welfare, Deptt. of I;ducation  Centre and States/UTs). (xiii) Urdu teachers should be aJlll)inted in all the Kendriya Vidyalayas and Navodaya   
14 Vidyalayas located in minority concentration tion, Ministry of HRD) areas and arrangement for teaching Urdu as a subject should also be made in these schools with immediate effect. (Action : Deptt. of Education, Ministry of HRD). (v) Complaints have been received that NCERT Urdu text books are not easily available at all or if available are not available on time. A time bound schedule should be prepared for publica (xiv) The number of students belonging to education tion and timely availabilty of Urdu textbooks ally backward minori~ shall determine the ap along with those of Hindi and English. The pointment of Urdu teachers and teaching of Bureau for Promotion of Urdu should be Urd~ a subject and also for establishment of' directed to publish text books for primary and Urdu medium schools. (Action : State Govern sec:ondary classes on priority basis in addition ments). to the text books being published by NCERT. (xv) In the schemes ofOperation.Blackboar(l. Adult Education and Non-formal Education and other such schemes where Urdu has been neglected For this purpose special funds should be provided to BPU. (Action: Deptt. of Education, Ministry of HRD). so far should be given due importance and Urdu (vi) An Urdu Open University may be established schools teachers/instructors in minority concentration should be appointed areas and ar in with a view to cater to the needs of the Urdu speaking people. (Action : UGC). rangement for Urdu facility should be made with immediate effect. (Action : Deptt. of Education, Ministry of HRD). (vii) All programmes of Minorities Edu<4ttiou should be given wide publicity through Radio, TV and Newspapers in regional and minority 3.5.2 Medium term measures include: languages in order that the programmes (i) Centrally sponsored I Central scheme of Area Intensive Programme for Educationally Back launched by the Government really reach the beneficiaries. (Action : Ministry of I & B). ward Minorities in the light of Revised NPE (viii) NCERT shoul,lbring out Urdu text books along (1986) and POA and the recommendations of with those of Hindi and English. The Bureau for other expert bodies. (Action : Deptt. of Educa Promo~on of Urdu should be directed to pub tion, Ministry of HRD). lish text books for primary and secondary clas (ii.a) Centrally Sponsored/Central Scheme of Modernisation of Madrasa E(:lucation by the in ses on top-priority basis. (Action : Deptt. of Education, Ministry of HRD). troduction of Science, Mathematics and (ix) There is a large concentration of minorities in English/Hindi in traditional Madrasas and urban slums. A Centrally sponsore1; Central Maktabs on Voluntary basis. (Action: Deptt. of Scheme be devised to cater to their education Education, Ministry of HRD). al, health and nutritional needs. Special in (b) The State Govts. would .,e encouraged to estab lish Madrasa Boards to look after the educ~tion of the$e the boards . minorities. to Effective be ensured through administration . of adequate staff support. (Action : States/UTs.). frastructure should be provided for implementing schemes of Operation Black board, Adult Education, Non-formal Education etc. (Action : Deptt. of ~ucation, Ministry of HRD; Ministry of Urban Development). (iii) Centrally sponsored/Central scheme of Ap . pointment of Urdu teachers in the States where Urdu is spoken by a substantial number of people with a view to a more effective im plementation of the Three-Language Formula as envisaged in the 1968 Policy, NPE-1986 and Revised NPE-1992. (Action: Deptt. of Educa (x) It should be ensured that the constitutional rights o~ the minorities in reSpect of opening and administration of institutions, admissions etc. are fully protected to uphold the cherished ideals of Constitution as defined in Articles 29, 30, and 350-A. (Action: Ministries of HRD, Welfare and Home Affairs, States/UTs). tion, Ministry of HRD). (xi) Where the situation warrants Urdu medium sec · (iv) A Centrally sponsored/Central Scheme of Lan guage teachers, funded by the Government of · India for more effective implementation of the safeguards guaranteed under the Constitution to linguistic minorities. (Action: Deptt. ofEduca tions may be opened in the existing secondary schools. Urdu knowing teachers should be ap pointed in anticipation of students offering Urdu as a medium. This will give the Urdu speaking students an opportunity to mix freely in the schools with students whose mother tongue is not Urdu and will promote national integration. However, new Urdu medium secondary/higher secondary schools should be opened ln artS§ of OOtleenttalion of education ally backward minorities in special dtctnnS&an ces. In such Urdu medium schools also there should be provision for parallel sections with regional languag<! as a medium. (Action : State/UTs.). (xii) The Central/State Governments should release grants to minority institutions on a quaterly basis in the interest of worlc and effeciency. (Action: Central and State Govemments/UTs). (xiii) A suitable incentive scheme to be devised to en courage States achieving the targets in respect of Minorities Education. (Action ; Deptt of Education, Ministry of HRD). (xiv) In areas whew there is concentration of the educationally backward minorities, girls hos tels to be constructed in schools and colleges on a priority basis. (Deptt. of Education Centre/States, M/0 Welfare and U.G.C.). (xv) VoiuntafY Orpnisations would be encouraged to set up ITis in minority ooncentration areas. Where necessary, suitable funding would be provided. (Action : Ministry of Labour, States/UTs ). 3.5.3 Long Term Programmes include: (a) Early Childhood Care and Education Centres Early Childhood Education Centres will be set up in Primary Sthools in areas pre-dominantly inhabited by educational ly backward minorities. Socially Useful Produ.ctive Work (SUPW) should also be introduced in such schools. The Department of Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development should prepare a schemeo~J'lce to State Governments in this regard. However the State-Govern~ ments will be encouraged to start their own prpogrammes in ECCE. (Action : Depu. of Education, Ministry of HRD). (b) Primary Education ., (i) Institutional system for compilation of statisti· cal information required by Commissioner for Linguistic minorities regarding educational facilities. (Action : State Govts./UTs.). (ii) Eliminating delay in sanctioning of linguistic ·.minority teachers' posts and appointment of teachers by delegation of powers to Disuict Collectors (Action : State Govts./UTs). 4-1-ll-ll M/n. H Rl1/9.'i 15 (hi) Survey on availability of textbooks in minority languages and setting up of printing facilities in minority languages. (Action : State Govts./UTs). (iv) Survey on availability of teacher training facilities for teachers in minority languages and measures to enhance such capacity wherever necessary. (Action: State Govts./UTs.). (v) EffortS will be made to utilise 15% of the cur ricular time for training in local crafts/trades and to arrange evening classes for children of artisans/agricultural labourers. (Action : State GovtsJUTs). (c) Middle and Higher Secondary Education (i) A scheme for in-service training from minority institution teachers in Science, Mathematics, Social Sciences, English and Career guidance, through SCERT and other resource centres and Slate career guidance institutions. At present the NCERT has a scheme for such courses. The proposal is to extend this activity through SCERTs and other above mentioned institu tions. (Action : State Govts./UTs) (ii) A scheme for Orientation Courses for Managers and Principals of minorities institutions in modern educational techniques by SCERT. This is being done by NCERT at present on a small scale. There is need to increase the coverage. (Action : State Govts./UTs). (iii) Scheme of appointment of regional language teachers in minority institutions for national in tegration and for implementation of the Three Language Formula. (Action : State Govts./UTs). (iv) A scheme of remedial coaching in minority· managed educational institutions. This shem1~ shollld also provide for enrichmQnt classes fc1r better· .students. (Action : State GovtsJUTs). (v) Minority .managed educational institutions w1iU be given fa.ir representation in the scheme for computer litek"aCY in school education (Acti·on : State GovtsNfs). (d) Higher Education In the hjgher education sector, educational trusts, founda tions and non-Governmental organisations to be supported and strengthenea to cater to the educ:ational needs of educa· tionally backward minorities. (Action : Dcptt. of Education Centre and States/UTs, Ministry of W clfare and State Wel fare Departments). (e) Vocational and Technical Education Provision of vocational courses in higher secondary schools specially catering to educationally backward minorities. (Action : State Govts./UTs). Ensuring that in all the programmes on technical and voca tional education included in the policy, minority run institu tions derive full benefiL (Action: StateGovts./UTs). Setting up Crafts Training Institutes in identified minority artisan concentration blocks, with 80% seats for artisans' children. Where these institutions are available, they are to be upgraded on selective basis as Advanced Craft Training Centres. Artisans children should be given preference in ad missiontoiTI's(Action: MinistriesofLabourandTextues, State Govts./UTs). (f) Women's Education (i) As the women literacy and the girls enrolment is lowest among educationally backward minorities, in tl\e schemes of opening of girls · scJlool$. ~ppointment of lady teachers, opening of girls' hostets and providing of incentives in the form of ·mid-day meals, uniforms etc. · Minorities needs should be fully meL.( Action : · State Govts./UT's). (ii) A Production-cuni-'fraining Centre for crafts exclusively for girls preferably with women in~ sttuctors to the extent possible in each of the identified minority concentration districts. (Ac . tion : State Govts./UTs). (g) Voluntary Effo.rt in Adult EduC.atipn &: Early Childhood Education · ' Orientation Courses for professionals from minority com munities to motivate voluntary effon; attaching one centre to all minority institutions to treate awareness of these schemes and to train supervisors for multiplier effect. (Ac tion : State Govts./UTs). (h) Libraries, Reading Rooms and Extension Work Scheme for encouraging setting up. of libraries, reading roooms cue. in minority areas; projects for educational ex 16 tension work in a few blocks on an experimental basis. (Ac tion : State Govts./UTs) (i) Scheme for Scholarships  Scheme for scholarships for weaker sections on 'merit-cum means basis, with in-built system of placement in good institutions; fee exemption/fee conces sion for artisans' children and other weaker sec tions; such help could be routed through Voluntary Agencies of All India repute. (Ac tion: DeptL of Education  Centre/States, Min istry of Welfare). 6. ORGANISATIONAL AND MANAGEMENT ISSUES (i) Bench Mark Survey and Research Studies 3.6.1 Arranging Bench mark Survey and periodical sur veys to assess the increase in literacy and in educational at tainments; scheme for periodical research studies on various aspects to improve the effeCtiveness of remedial measures especially relative availability of schools in minority con ~ritration areas. (Action: State Governntents/UTs). (ii) Association or Educationally Backward Minorities with Boards or Education and other Advisory Bodies 3.6.2 Educationally Backward minorities to be associated with various Education Boards and Advisory Committees at Central and State levels. (Action : Depu. of Education C~tr3J.tstate Governments) . (iii) Monitoring Arrangements 3.6.3 A Cell will be created in the Union Education Department and in the State Education Departments ex clusively for monitoring implementation of programmes for educationally backward minorities. · (iv) Review and Evaluation 3.6.4 ~be a departmental review and evaluation by11Dootside agency of all minority education programmes every year.   
4. EDUCATION OF THE HANDICAPPED   
1. PRESENT SI1UA TION 4.1.1 It is tstimated that about 12.59 million children with disabilities are to be provided education in the school sys tem. The details are as follows : Figiues in Million Projected Population of 3.19 children with disability in the age-group 5-14 years@ 4.1.5 The innovative multi-category training of resource teachers has been found to be effective and has been in stitutionalised in the Regional Colleges of Educatipn, the universities offering special education courses and the ttain ing programmes organised by Non-Governmental· Or ganisations. 4.1.6 Each DIET has been provided a resource centre for demonstrations orienting elementary in lab areas. teachers Faculty and from establishing 102 DIETs field have so far ft!Ceived induction training at the NCERT. 4.1.7 The Ministry of Welfare had taken steps w ensure supply of trained manpower to special schools and improve standards in these schools through the National Institutes for the Handicapped (NIHs) and increased support to NGOs. 4.1.8 The Ministry of Labour manages 17 Vocatjonal Rehabilitation Centres (VRCs) for the handicapped and helps in their· placement also. About 66,000 persons with disability have been rehabilitated under this scheme by Sep tember, 1991. Three percent of seats for admission toms and under the Apprenticeship Training Scheme are avail able for handicapped persons. These seats are being fully utilised. 4.1.9 The evaluation of special schools and the scheme of IEDC has revealed some grey areas. General education sys tem is not yet mobilised; to a noticeable extent, for educa tion of the handicapped, either at the Central or State level. Inputs from different schemes like CBR, DRC, ECCE, non formal education, adult education, vocational-and technical education, etc. are not being brought together for the educa tion of the physically handicapped. Some States are still reluctant to implement IEDC while some are implementing it rather indifferen\ly. Few NGOs are active in rural areas. The standard of education in special schools needs improve menL Facilities for the education of children with multiple handicaps are yet to~ developed. The early detection and intervention programmes so essential for education of these children have yet to be started. The goal of UEE for this dis advantaged group would remain an unachievatile dream un less concerted and urgent measures are taken. Locomotor Handicap 1.48 Hearing Handicap 0.65 Speech Handicap 0.91 Visual Handicap 0.15 Mentally in the age retarded group 5-14 children * 3.60 Children with learning dis 3.60 ability in the age group 5-14 Children with disability in 2.20 the age group 16-18 years @ The 1981 figures of the survey by NSSO have been ex trapolated on the assumption that population with dis abilities would have grown at the same rate as the general population. * Estimated at 1 CJb of the population in the age group 5-14 years. Out of these, about half a million require vocatic.n.ll ttain ing. 4.1.2 The educability of another 2 million disabled children is to be improved through early intervention and services by ECCE. 4.1.3 At the end of 1991-92 about 30,000 children with disability were availing special benefits under the scheme of Integrated Education for Disabled Children (IEDC); In addition, about 60,000 children with milu. disabilities received resource support without special benefits. A large number of children with disability are also receiving educa tion in special schOQls which number about 1035. 4.1.4 The Project Integrated Education for Disabled (PIED) is being implemented, as a field demonstration, in one block each in ten States and Union Territories. In these blocks about 90 per cent of children with disability are receiving education in general schools per pupil in these blocks is now around Rs. 2,000/ and is likely to come down further as the number of beneficiaries increases. General teachers feel confident and motivated as their status in the community has improved due to the services they provide. 4.1.5 The innovative multi-category training of resource teachers has been found to be effective and has been in stitutionalised in the Regional Colleges of Educatipn, the universities offering special education courses and the ttain ing programmes organised by Non-Governmental· Or ganisations. 4.1.6 Each DIET has been provided a resource centre for demonstrations orienting elementary in lab areas. teachers Faculty and from establishing 102 DIETs field have so far ft!Ceived induction training at the NCERT. 4.1.7 The Ministry of Welfare had taken steps w ensure supply of trained manpower to special schools and improve standards in these schools through the National Institutes for the Handicapped (NIHs) and increased support to NGOs. 4.1.8 The Ministry of Labour manages 17 Vocatjonal Rehabilitation Centres (VRCs) for the handicapped and helps in their· placement also. About 66,000 persons with disability have been rehabilitated under this scheme by Sep tember, 1991. Three percent of seats for admission toms and under the Apprenticeship Training Scheme are avail able for handicapped persons. These seats are being fully utilised. 4.1.9 The evaluation of special schools and the scheme of IEDC has revealed some grey areas. General education sys tem is not yet mobilised; to a noticeable extent, for educa tion of the handicapped, either at the Central or State level. Inputs from different schemes like CBR, DRC, ECCE, non formal education, adult education, vocational-and technical education, etc. are not being brought together for the educa tion of the physically handicapped. Some States are still reluctant to implement IEDC while some are implementing it rather indifferen\ly. Few NGOs are active in rural areas. The standard of education in special schools needs improve menL Facilities for the education of children with multiple handicaps are yet to~ developed. The early detection and intervention programmes so essential for education of these children have yet to be started. The goal of UEE for this dis advantaged group would remain an unachievatile dream un less concerted and urgent measures are taken. 4.1.5 The innovative multi-category training of resource teachers has been found to be effective and has been in stitutionalised in the Regional Colleges of Educatipn, the universities offering special education courses and the ttain ing programmes organised by Non-Governmental· Or ganisations. 4.1.6 Each DIET has been provided a resource centre for demonstrations orienting elementary in lab areas. teachers Faculty and from establishing 102 DIETs field have so far ft!Ceived induction training at the NCERT. 4.1.7 The Ministry of Welfare had taken steps w ensure supply of trained manpower to special schools and improve standards in these schools through the National Institutes for the Handicapped (NIHs) and increased support to NGOs. 4.1.8 The Ministry of Labour manages 17 Vocatjonal Rehabilitation Centres (VRCs) for the handicapped and helps in their· placement also. About 66,000 persons with disability have been rehabilitated under this scheme by Sep tember, 1991. Three percent of seats for admission toms and under the Apprenticeship Training Scheme are avail able for handicapped persons. These seats are being fully utilised. 4.1.9 The evaluation of special schools and the scheme of IEDC has revealed some grey areas. General education sys tem is not yet mobilised; to a noticeable extent, for educa tion of the handicapped, either at the Central or State level. Inputs from different schemes like CBR, DRC, ECCE, non formal education, adult education, vocational-and technical education, etc. are not being brought together for the educa tion of the physically handicapped. Some States are still reluctant to implement IEDC while some are implementing it rather indifferen\ly. Few NGOs are active in rural areas. The standard of education in special schools needs improve menL Facilities for the education of children with multiple handicaps are yet to~ developed. The early detection and intervention programmes so essential for education of these children have yet to be started. The goal of UEE for this dis advantaged group would remain an unachievatile dream un less concerted and urgent measures are taken. 2. NPE REVIEW PERSPECTIVE 4.2.1 As part of its concern for equalisation of education al opportunities, the NPE, 1986 focuses on the needs of children with disabilities. The NPE, 1986 recommended an integrated education in general schools for children with locomotor handicaps and with other mild disabilities, orien tation and pre-service ttaining of general teachers to meet special needs of these children, provision of vocational training, establishment of special schools for severely dis abled children and encouragement of voluntary organisa tions in these tasks. The POA suggested a pragmatic place ment principle. It postulated that a child with disability who can be educated in a general school should be educated in a general school only and not in a.spccial school. Even !hose children who are initially admitted to special schools for training in plus curriculum skills should be transferred to general schools once they acquire daily living skills, com munication skills and basic academic skills. 3. TARGETS 4.3.1 For achieving equalisation of educational oppor tunities, children with disability should have access to quality education comparable to other children. However, considering the financial resources likely to be available during the 8th Plan the targets for education of disabled children would be as follows: (i) Children who can be t:ducated in general primary schools (a) Universal enrolment by the end of 9th Five Year Plan. (b) Ensuring achievement of minimum level oflearning through adjusuncnt and adapta tion of curriculum and teaching to special needs. (ii) Children who require to be educated in special schools or special classes in general schools (a) Universal enrolment by the end of the 9th Five Year Plail. (b) Ensuring achievement of level of learning commenswate with their potential. (iii) Reduction of drop out rates on par with other children. (iv) Providing access to disabled children to secon dary and senior secondary schools with resource support and "naking special provision for vocational training of these children, par ticularly those with intellectual disabilities. (v) Reorienting pre-service and in-service teacher education programmes including pre-school teachers training programmes to meet special needs in the classroom. (vi) Reorienting adult and non-formal education programmes to meet educational and vocation al training needs of persons with disability. 4. IMPLEMENTATIONSTRATEGIES 4.4.1 The strategy of area-specific and population specific micro-planning for UEE is equally relevant for this disadvantaged group. Planning for UEE and adult literacy 18 at all levels  Centre, State, District, Block and Project  should provide for the educational needs of this category of children. 4.4.2 Education of childre!l with disability will be a com ponent in the training of educational planners and ad ministrators as well as preservice and inS6rvi~ teachers. PIETs, CTEs and lASEs which have been provided facilities for J}lis component will have to pay particular at tention to thi~ aspect of teach~r training. While drawing up schemes for strengthening SCERT$, cells for education of the handicapped may be considered as envisage{J in IEDC. 4.4.3 The material supplied under Operation Blackboard will have to take into consideration special needs of these children. School building~ will have to take note of architec tural adjusunents needed t.9 ensure access to children with disability, at the consuuction stage itself so as to avoid ex penditure on modifications later on. Special scllools need to be opened in the districts which have no special school facilities. The education of the handicapped should form an essential component in all externally assisted basic educa tion projects being implemented or proposed to be imple mented. 5. INTEGRA TED EDUCATION f02. J;>IS~J.ED CHILDREN (IEDC) 4.5.l The POA, 1986 target of increasing enrolment of children by 25 per cent per year was achieved as enrolment of disabled children in gcn~:ral schools increased from 15,000 to 30,000. Subject to availability of resources, the cumulative enrolment would reach 50,000 by the end gf ~ 8th Plan. However, an additional 1,00,000 children with mild disabilities will be provided resource support from teachers and learning aids and equipment. 4.5.2 The following actions are needed for achieving the targets laid down: (i) Adequate allocations of resources. (ii) Provision for education of persons with dis ~bibty should be made an integral component in ex"rMIJY assisted basic education projects. (iii) Provision for education, ,gf disabled children should be made in the Centrally Sppnsored Schemes of Operation Blackboard, Vocationalisation of Education and Non-For mal Education. (iv) Co-ordinated implementation of schemes like Community Based Rehabilitation, ECCE, VRCs and IEDC so as to reduce cost and achieve higher coverage. This would require coordination among the Ministries/Depart ments of Health, Welfare, Education, Women & Chiid Development and Labour. (v) The NGOs have to ~encouraged to implement IEDC, particularly in rural areas. The NGOs in volved in other educational activities will be en couraged to work in this area also and assisted in developing their expertise. 6. SPECIAL SCHOOLS 4.6.1 . The POA envisaged provision of an additional400 special schools at the district headquarters. However, be cause of resource constraints no J\eW special school has~ established. The Ministry of Welfare has identified 240dis tricts without any special schooling facility. Efforts would be made to provide special schools in these districts by the end of 9th Five Year Plan. 7. VOCATIONAL TRAINING 4.7.1 The Ministry of Labour is providing vocational training to the handicapped through the Craftsman Training Scheme (CTS), the Apprenticeship Training Scheme and separate Vocational Rehabilitation Centres (VRCs). Three per cent of the seats for admission to ITis under the Craftsman Training Scheme and Apprenticeship Training Scheme are reserved for candidates who are handicapped but have aptitude and are otherwise' fit to undergo there quired training. The States/UTs. have been advised f~m time to tinie to 'implement this reservation for the hand icapped which will be continued during the 8th Plan also. Seventeen VRCs will continue to provide training to a larger number of handicapped persons during the 8th plan. The in structors in ms will receive orientation to meet special needs of handicapped persons. This component will be added in m instructor's training programme. Adjustment and adaptation of equipment to provide full access to dis abled persons will be ensured. 4.7.2 The National Institutes for the Handicapped under the Ministry of Welfare will continue their efforts to provide vocational training to the handicapped. 4.7.3 The Department of Education will also encourage voluntary organisations working in the area of vocational education and training for the handicapped. The CIVE will provide support to vocational training }X'OgramJ,Des for tile handicapped through teacher training material and other resources. 8. ORIENT A TION AND TRAINING OF TEACHERS 4.8.1 All the DIETs to be established by the end of the 8th Plan will have a resource room and trained faculty to teach the essential component of education of children with dis ability. They will also run orientation programmes for teachers at leut from lab areas and practising schools to es tablish field demonstration of IEDC programme. The SCERTs will support field demonstrations under the scheme of IEDC. Similar actioo is suggested for the 250 19 CTEs and 50 lASEs. The budget provision. is available in the scheme itself. The pre-se~ice training curriculum will · induct essential components fn these. areas, wherever it has not been done so far. ·~· 4.8.2 All in-service teachers should IICIIIJiye awareness input on education of children with disabilitt in orientation programmes. In each area/institution where ~DC is imple mented all teachers will receive orientation as envisaged in the scheme of IEDC. The heads of institutions and educa tional administrators will also receive training. Considering the large nUnibers to be covered, the Indira Gandhi Nation al Open University and NCERT should plan credit courses on special education to equip general teachers to meet spe cial needs. The NCERT will provide training to the IEDC cell staff. Multicategory training of resource teachers will be encouraged in UGC supported programmes. 9. TRAINING OF EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATORS 4.9.1 The NIEPA in collaboration with NCERT should devel9p programmes for training educational ad ministrators and making them aw~ of the needs of this group. The IGNOU should design and offer courses for this target grou~ also. 10. SPECIAL TEACHERS 4 .10.1 The NIHs and its regiooa,l training centres have built up cppacity to train single disability special teachers for spe cial schools. Besides meeting d(mlands of the new special schools, the existing untrained teacherS will be trained and backlog cleared by the end of the 8th Plan. Inservice train ing of special teachers will be planned in a way that each teacher receives a three-week course every four years. 4.10.2 Efforts will. be made tO promote special education units in university departme~_tts. of education for training teachers to handle multicategory disabilities. 11. EDUCATIONAL·AND VOCATIONAL GUIDANCE PERSONNEL 4.11.1 The existing educatio~ and vocatiorJal guidance·, counsellots should be provided training in dealmg with diS ; abled children and their parents. Es~ntial component shoUld also be adde4 to. their preservicetraining program ·. mes. The NCERT and NIHs should design and offer in-ser ' vice course for in-seryice coimsellors. · 12. CONTENT AND PROCESS 4.12.1 Curriculum flexibility is of speCial significance for these children. Special needs of these children will be met, if child centred education is practised. The curriculum ad justment and adaptation of teaching methods and material i will be wol'ked out, ftekf.tried and provided to the users. The following actions will be taken: (i) Guidelines for child centred education, includ ing special needs in the classro<>m, being developed at tlte NCERT will be made avail able by mid 1993. (ii) Guidelines for adjustment of curriculum and in structional material and methods for visually and hearing handicapped at primary level have been developed. These will be ~de available to teachers. Work for upper primary and secon dary school level will be started and completed by the end of 1994. (iii) The achievement of minimum levels of learn ing by children with mild disabilities should be ensured through resource support and alterna tive learning material, wherever needed. (iv) The Boards of Examination should make ad justment and adaptations in examination for t1te handicapped children. (v) Study of more than one fanguage should not be compulsory for deaf children. (vi) Teaching of Science and Mathematics is either not available to handicapped children or they opt for an easier substitute. Special efforts should be made by the NIHs and the NCERT to develop an action programme to improve ac cess of disabled children to these important areas. (vii) Child-to-child help in education of children with disability is an effective resource in view of large classes and multigrade teaching. NC~T should develop a package and make it available to teachers by the end of 1993. (viii) The special learning aids and equipment like braille books, braille kit, audio visual material will be developed and made available to schools by NIHs and NCERT. 13. USE OF MASS MEDIA 4.13.1 Radio and television are being used in a limited way bo&h for advocacy as well as educational purposes. The CIET, SIETs, NIHs and other organisations will develop a variety of programmes so that they can be regularly telecast/broadcast The MHRD will approach the Ministry 20 of. Information and Broadcasting for providing adequate time for this purpose. 4.13.2 The CIET, SIETs and NIHs will also develop software in non-telecast inode and make it available to DIETs, other training centres and NGOs working with dis abled persons. 4.13.3 Field publici~y units sh~uld be utilised by States for advocacy programmes. Newspapers and magaZines have started popular advocacy and educational writing in this area. The NCERT and the NIHs wilfdevelop packages and hand over to journalists in workshops-. 14. A V AILABILilY OF SPECIAL LEARNING MATERIAL AND AIDS 4.14.1 Learning material in braille is still not available to all children. Same is the case with aids like braille slate, Taylor frame, etc. Similarly language training material for speech and hearing handicapped is not available in regional languages. Steps will be taken by the NIVH, A YJNIHH, NIMH and the NCERT to ensure the availability of such material. 15. MONITORING AND EVALUATION 4.15.1 The availability of a reliable data base is essential for proper monitoring and evaluation of educational programmes for persons with disability. Towards this end tlte District Education Office, must, with tlte help of other agencies, collect data about the number of disabied persons in the District disability wise, sex wise and age group wise; benefteiaries under IEDC, special schools, ms, VRCs, etc., number of special and resource teachers, their qualifications and pay scale, and budget utilisation. Similar information should also be included in the statistics collected by MHRD as also the Educatio~ ~urveys conducted b~ NCERT. 4.15.2 The MHRD and the Ministty of Welfare should ' make grants under IEDC and special schools contingent on the periodic returns giving the information. An inter departmental Committee should be set up at the State and Central levels for monitoring. In addition, regular visits by tlte officers of the MHRD, NCERT, Regional Colleges of Education and field offices, should lead to status reports. 4.15.3 Evaluation studies by external agencies, universities conducting courses on education and rehabilitation of per sons in specifte geographical areas will be co_mmissioned by MHRD and the Ministty of Welfare.   
5. ADULT AND CONTINUING EDUCATION 1. PRESENT SITUATION 5.1.1 The National Literacy Mission (NLM) was launched as a societal and technology Mission on 5th May, 1988 with the objective of imparting functional literacy to 80 million illiterate adults in 15-35 age group by 1995. Built on an objective assessment ofthe strength. and we8knesses of the National Adult Education Programme it has imparted a new sense of urgency •. new emphasis and seriousness to the problem of eradication of illiteracy in the country. The· . implementation of the programme' of adult literacy and education in a'Mission mode durin,g the last four years has· confmned in more than one sense that eradication of il literacy is possible, feasible and achievable. This has been demonstrated by the provisional figures of 1991 census which revealed that the literacy rate for the population aged 7 years and above in the country increasea' from 43.56% in· The 198l·to country 52.11% achieved in 1991, for registering the fii'St time. an iitcreasc me distinction by 8.55%. of haviflg larger numbei ofJ.ilt.erate persons (352millions) than ' that of the illiterate ones (324 millions). After experiment-. ing with successive alteinative models of literacy program mes, we. hav~ settled do·wn to .one which is ~own as campaign for total literacy which is area-specific, time bound, volunteer based, cost-effective. and outcome oriented. This has given us lot of hope and faith that il literacy is nota fatality and can be overcome in a time bound manner. with plan.ned, concerted and. co-ordinated effort~. Masscampaignsfortotalliteracy have been launched in 156 disUicts (either fully or partially) during the last 2-3 years. Even though.the emphasisqnder NLM is on imparting func tional liter&c~ to illiterate &dolts in the age~group 15-35, potentiaUearners in the age-group 9-14 and above the age of 35 have. also~ enrolled in .. most of thes! campaigns. , Taken toge~er. about . SS million potential learners are presently covered in these campaigns. While the total · .. literacy campaigns have made some impact in few parts oL the country, the States of Bihar, Rajasthan, Arunachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Uuar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Meghalaya and Orissa and UT ofDadra & Nagar Haveli are signif1C8Dtly siveeft'ons have, below therefore, the national to be made average and of special 52.11%. strategies Inten· . to be States/UTa adopted with to specJal improve'literacy emphuis on persons situation belonging in these to SCI/STI and women. 2. STRATBOIBS CAMPAIGN DOMINANT APPROACH STRATBOY OP IMPL!MBNTATION 10 BB THB • MASS 5.2.1 The mua campaip approach is based on mua mobiUudon and support ~government cbodl Centralud State), district administration, non-governmental and voluntary agencies, people from all sections of the society and all walks of life with a tinge of voluntarism, a compact, well-knit and efficient management structure with an in built monitoring system. The efficacy of this approach has been established beyond doubt in as much as it has succeeded in transforming a fully government-funded and government controlled traditio,nal centre-based programme (which was also honorarium-based) ·into a mass campaign leading .towards a people's movement for total literacy and a new awakernng. The Total Literacy Campaign {TLC) approach · constitqtes the principal strategy of NLM and would con tinue to be sO for such time till the goal of universal literacy has been fully ac,hieved. 5,2.2 · As a result of the evolution of the programmes of ·literacy, post-literacy and continuing Cducation during the past four years or so under the NLM, a clear and comprehen .. sive conceptuaVsation of the total programme bas already emerged and would. be adopted for future work. This will include thefollowing: i) Basic literacy for aboQt 200 hours Spread over about six months which will basically be. a . guided learning programme; ii) Systeinatic post-literacy programme for about 50 additional hours spread over two month:; which will start with guided learning and will culminate into self-learning by making the Ieamer self-reliant; and iii) Self-directed continuing education in th~ perspective oflife-long learning through libnuy service, newspapers for nco-literates, charcha mandai, and such other activities. This may also include the· skill ~v~lopment programme for · personal, social and occupational development. 3. PROCESS , ' .. ' 5.3.1 The process involved in hnplementation of the mass campaign for total literacy strategy would include the fol· lowing: a) Persuading the State Oovemments/UT ad.' for for ministrations achieving the atate is /to total a formulate whole literacy u also detailed belen for 1997 each action ·98. dislrict plans The imperativea of literacy would be built into the proceu educational at all levels; and developmental planning b) Orientation of political partiea, u also ropro· sentativea of the people (MPa, MLAI, MLCI, ~· .. Chainnen. Zilla Parishads, Panchayat Samitis, Mandai Panchayats/Panchayats, Municipalities, notified area councils, etc.) to come together, plan together, work together and pledge their unqualified solidarity and support to the campaign experiment despite their ideological and political differences. c) Orientation of officers of all departments (of both Central and State Governemnts) at the state and district level in the campaign approach so as to secure their c<raperation and support to the campaign at all stages of its operationalisa tion. d) Registration of Saksharata Samitis in the dis tricts/areas where mass campaigns for total literacy are to be taken up with representation of officials, non-official members, "voluntary agencies, educational institutions and opinion leaders in the community/society. e) Mass mobilisation of all sections of the society like teachers and students of educational institu tions, employers, trade unions, members of dis ciplined forces, ex-servicemen, banks, co-operatives, educated unemployed youth, voluntary agencies and the volunteers mobilised by them for combating illiteracy. The important role of voluntary agencies in mass mobilisation will be continued and sttengthened. f) Peoples' participation in environment building. planning and operationalisation of the cam paigns by assigning specific roles to key resource persons, resource persons, master trainers, volunteers, etc. and by serving on various committees at the district, Panchayat Samiti/Mandal Panchayat/Panchayat and vil· lage levels. This should lead to emergence of various grass roots level community institu tions, including the Village Education Commit tees. g) Creation of people oriented, well-knit manage ment suuctures at the district, taluka, block, mandal/panchayat and village levels consisting of both officials and non-officials to function in a decentralised, debureaucratised and participa tive mode with a view to ensuring participation and support of people at all levels. For this pur pose, services of experienced and committed personnel would be obtained from educational institutions, central and State government departments, Central and State public sector un dertakings, autonomous bodies, etc. preferably on secondment basis. h) Effective involvement of good, committed and reliable voluntary agencies interested in taking up campaigns for total literacy in small and compact areas where total literacy campaigns are not being implemented and bringing them under the umbrella of TLC wherever a lLC is being undertaken with a view to securing their support and services for the campaign. i) Mobilising and harnessing all components of the educational system at the university, col lege/schoollevel for promoting literacy as part of their social obligation. j) Elaboration of the present NLM nonns into ap propriate and specific competencies in literacy and post-literacy for ensuring effective achievement. k) Insistence on the preparation of teaching/learn ing material on the motivation centred techni que of Improved Pace and _Content of Learning (IPCL) in the campaigns supplemented by readers on host of development messages such as health, family welfare, immunisation, nutri tion, maternity protection, child care, protection of environment, small family norm and women's equality, etc. I) Insistence on all institutions/agencies/in dividuals interested in literacy work to work with understanding, rapport and bonhomie and carry out specific assignments re.Iated to material production, training and environment building under the leadership and direction of the concerned saksharata samiti. m) Ensuring implementation of the total literacy campaigns in accordance with the guidelines of the National Literacy Mission Authority (NLMA) combined with such flexibility and freedom as may be necessitated by local condi tions. n) The Central/State Governments/UT Ad ministrations and CentraVState public sector undertakings to make available the personnel at various levels to work for the campaigns as and when requested to do so and to ensure a reasonable continuity in their tenure so as to avoid a dislocation in pace and momentum of the n.c. t • 4. ENVIRONMENT BUllDING A CONTINUED NECESSITY 5.4.1 Both the literate and the educated will be sensitised to take literacy work with a sense of pride, patriotism and social obligation. The community of learners will be motivated and mobilised for literacy to perceive the need for literacy and intemalise this need for their collective well being. For this pwpose, environment building activities · would continue to be undertaken through organisation of jathas, street plays and nulckad nataks, wall writings, literacy songs and slogans, articles in newspapers and magazines by creative writers, thinkers and opinion leaders, etc. 5.4 .2 Media would be used in literacy promotion as a tool of dissemination of information, as a tool of mobilisation, motivation and sensitisation, as a tool of learning by shar ing information, ideas and experiences and as a tool of so cial action for change. For this purpose, discussion on various aspects relating to literacy would be arranged on Doordarshan and Radio, spots and motivational ftlms would be produced and shown on TV and classes conducted through radio. Both print and non~print media, including the traditional folk arts, would be fully harnessed for dissemi nating the message of literacy llnd for creating a positive climate for literacy. 5. INTEGRATION WITH OTHER DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENTS ' 5.5.1 With a view to ensuring that acquisition of literacy actually enables the neo-literates to participate in various processes of national development, the NLM would be geared to the nationally accepted goals by way of develop ment of an effective linkage between literacy and other development programmes. In particular, the endeavour of the NLMA would be on the following: a) All development departments/agencies would be fully oriented to literacy and sensitised to im prove and strengthen the delivery mechanism for which they are directly or indirectly respon sible with a view to meeting the natural demand and ·sometimes heightened aspirations of the people (arising as a result of the campaign for literacy) which in turn will sustain the need for literacy. b) Benefits available under various protective and anti exploitative laws, institutions as well as development schemes would be made available to learners with a view to alleviating their poverty and deprivation, promoting general and economic well being to the extent possible and ensuring an effective participation in the affairs of family, community and society as also larger affairs of the nation. 5-XXI Min. HRD/95 23 c) Social, emotional and linguistic integration, communal harmony, tolerance of and respect for each others' faith and belief which has been achieved to a fair extent in many of the cam . paign districts would continue to be sustained and invigorated. d) Literacy campaigns would take up activities re lated to·protection and conservation of environ ment with a view to generating intensive awareness for such conservation and formation of groups, wherever possible which will provide the nuclei for all activities which go with conservation. Such activities will be in tegrated into the content of primers, content of materials for neo-literates, curriculum and course content of training and orientation of all functionaries, transaction of instructional les sons, evaloation, etc. This will enable the learners aud neo-literates to assimilate, imbibe and intemalise the messages related to conser vation. e) Propagation of the message of small family norm which has been yet another issue of na tional concern as also one of the sub-themes of all literacy campaigns would continue to be ac celerated. This, alongwith other measures like importance of delayed marriage, proper spac ing, changing existihg social biases in favour of the male child in our society, etc. will be in tegrated into the content of the primer, content of materials for neo-literates, curriculum and course content of training and orientation of all functionaries, transaction of instructional les sons, evaluation, etc. f) Promotion of women's equality will be a major area of focus in literacy programmes. Working towards this objective will have following im plications for planning and implementation of lLCs: i) Enabling the participation of women in the decision making processes of the campaign and developing organising skills. ii) Ensuring widest possible participation of women as teachers and learners in the teaching-learning process. iii) Organising activities specifically designed to bring about attitudinal change amongst men, thereby developing a greater sen sitivity towards the difficulties faced by women in Indian society. This should lead to collective action to remove such dif ficulties wherever possible. iv) Promoting the formation of women's or ganisations which will take up issues relat ing to women's rights. v) Providing suitable avenues of gainful employment of women and ensuring their participation in every stage of the develop --meutal process. vi) Ensuring that society as a whole is sen sitised to the need to translate a8surances of equality into concrete action such as payment of equal wag~s for equal work. vii) Designing and promoting innovative and imaginative schemes which consciously work towards women's equality and em powermenL Existing models such as the Women's Development Project (WOP), or the Mahila Samakhya concept, would be enlarged in scope and ambit, and integrated with literacy campaigns. viii) Creating structures, and facilitating mechanisms by which the concept of women's equality and gender justice is in tegrated at all level:> with the work of the Saksharta Samitis be it in training, con tent or participation. g) An important and positive fallout of the cam paigns is that parental demand for enrolment and retention of children in the formal school system has increased manifold. Endeavour would be made to positively respond to such demand by opening new schools, adding rooms to the existing school buildings, appointing ad ditional teachers and arranging their orientation and training and improving the operational ef ficiency gf the delivery system so that it can ab sorb the growing demand. Simultaneously efforts would be,made to provide appropriate and needbased non-formal education to work ing children in 9-14 age group so that they do not, after reaching adulthood, add up to the ranks of illiterate adults. For this purpose, an ef fective linkage would be established with programmes/activities related to UEE, includ ingNFE. h) Messages of basic health care and programmes formulted thereunder, both protective, curative and preventive with special emphasis on health care programmes for women and children, would be integrated into the content and process of campaign materials, training, environment building, actual teaching learning phase, etc. in the same manner as small family norm, conser 24 vation of environment and women's equality. 6. ACADEMIC AND TECHNICAL RESOURCE SUPPORT 5.6.1 In view of the iocreasing responsibilities of the State Resource Centres (SRCs) in the wake of 1LCs having been launched in 156 districts in the country and similar cam paigns likely to be launched in about 200 additional districtS during the 8th Five Year Plan, the SRCs, which have been providing academic and technical resource support to the literacy and adult education programme, would be suitably equipped, strengthened and stabilised so as to enable them to shoulder their responsibilities in an effective manner and without any uncertainty. The services of District Institutes of Education and Training (DIETs) and District Resource Units (DRUs) would also be suitably used in providing academic and technical resource support to the campaigns for total literacy particularly at the district and block levels. Wherever considered necessary, their working will be reviewed and revamped in such manner as would admirab ly serve the purpose for which they have been set up. 5.6.2 Additionally, with a view to making orientation and training programmes for functionaries of the total literacy campaigns at various levels more effective and further im proving other aspects of academic and technical resource support to the programme, the following measures would be taken: i) Establishing a national pool of resource persons for covering various elements of the NLM strategy, by drawing upon the stock of expert personnel already available in practically all the States in universities, SRCs, State-level and na tional institutions of education and social scien ces and eminent non-governmental organizations engaged in education and development activities at the grass-roots level. ii) Establishing a State-level pool of scholars and resource persons to enable the SRCs a'ld other State-level resource organizations to avail of their expertise so as to build up effective programmes of resource support to literacy, post-literacy and continuing education at the State and district levels. iii) Utilizing the services of experts from all over the country for the preparation of orientation plans and development of materials for the guidance of resource persons. In this connec tion, activities at the national level would be closely inter-linked with similar activities to be undertaken at the State level, in a flexible man ner and with active participation of state-level I I > a) Keeping in view the wide variations in the levels of literacy and numeracy achieved by those who are supposed to have become literate and keeping in view the possibility that a sub stantial proportion of persons who have ac quired basic literacy skills through the total literacy campaigns will tend to relapse into il literacy, different strategies for post-literacy and continuing education would be evolved and used in different parts of the country keeping in view the local needs and priorities, levels of achievement in the basic literacy pha~: and the situation in which most of the leemers are placed. b) The planning for each post-literacy programme would be initiated much in advance and preferably in the middle of the basic learning phase of the campaign so that the time gap/inter-regnum between close of the basic literacy phase and commencement of the post literacy phase is minimised. c) Post-literacy would be a planned, structured and co-ordinated effort and would preferably be implemented in a campaign mode as in the TLC. The Saksharta Samiti at the district level and similar peoples' committees at the block/mandai panchayat, panchayat and village level would continue to provide leadership and direction for the post-literacy campaign as in theTLC. d) The three important goals of post-literacy programme would be remediation by way of str.:ting a bridge course of 30-40 hours' dura e) As the frame-work of the Jana Shikshan Nilayam (JSN) as a strategy designed to cater to the post literacy and continuing education needs of the nco-literates of the centre-based programme may not be of universal application, particularly in the areas covered by total literacy campaigns, it would not be the only mode of post-literacy. It would be the endeavour of the NLMA to provide an institutional frame-work in the form of learning centres in every vil lage/habitation/urban slum in as decentralised and debureaucratised mode as possible. Ir respective of the form the learning centres may take, it would be ensured that the community is fully involved in planning and implementation of the post literacy programmes, the ultimate objective being to organise the unorganised. Functioning of JSNs would be reviewed with a view to making them mere effective and ensur ing that they subserve the purpose for which · they have been set up. Where JSNs and other forms of learning centres co-exist, an effective linkage between the two would be established. e) As the frame-work of the Jana Shikshan Nilayam (JSN) as a strategy designed to cater to the post literacy and continuing education needs of the nco-literates of the centre-based programme may not be of universal application, particularly in the areas covered by total literacy campaigns, it would not be the only mode of post-literacy. It would be the endeavour of the NLMA to provide an institutional frame-work in the form of learning centres in every vil lage/habitation/urban slum in as decentralised and debureaucratised mode as possible. Ir respective of the form the learning centres may take, it would be ensured that the community is fully involved in planning and implementation of the post literacy programmes, the ultimate objective being to organise the unorganised. Functioning of JSNs would be reviewed with a view to making them mere effective and ensur ing that they subserve the purpose for which · they have been set up. Where JSNs and other forms of learning centres co-exist, an effective linkage between the two would be established. f) Each post-literacy programme would be suitab ly integrated with programmes of other development departments. These departments would provide facilities for location of the learning centres, impart training to the beneficiaries of the post-literacy programme and would provide literature on activities/ programmes being undertaken by them, besides meeting and talking to the learners at the post literacy centres to understand the existential reality of the situation in which they have been placed and to provide support services to mini mise the rigour and hardship of their existence. g) Schemes/programmes of TRYSEM, DW ACRA, SCYTES, etc. would be suitably interlinked with post-literacy and continuing education so that the facilities under these schemes are available to the neo-literates. h) Newspapers for neo-literates, neo-literates' newsletter, wall papers;periodicals, magazines, etc. would become a part of supportive learning strategy. i) The library movement like the Kerala Granthshala Sangam would be converted experts in order to respond to varied needs and situations in different States 1. POST-l:.ITERACY AND CONTINUING EDUCATION S.7.t Literacy per se is a minimal and imperative entry point to the world of information and communication. It is a basic step towards adult education which is a process of iife-long learning. This ent_ry point will have to be carried forward, sharpened and refined to enable learners to enrich their knowledge, to acquire skills for improving their func tional capability keeping in view the latest developments and to apply literacy skills for solution of their day-to-day problems and improve their well-being. Post-literacy and Continuing Education programmes would be organised keeping these objectives of adult education in view. The main features of the post-literacy and continuing education p~gramme to be implemented under the Mission would in cl&,~de the following: 2S lion, continuation of learning activities through facilities oflibraries and reading rooms, supply of reading material suiting the felt needs and in terest of learners and application of literacy skills to actual living and working situations. e) As the frame-work of the Jana Shikshan Nilayam (JSN) as a strategy designed to cater to the post literacy and continuing education needs of the nco-literates of the centre-based programme may not be of universal application, particularly in the areas covered by total literacy campaigns, it would not be the only mode of post-literacy. It would be the endeavour of the NLMA to provide an institutional frame-work in the form of learning centres in every vil lage/habitation/urban slum in as decentralised and debureaucratised mode as possible. Ir respective of the form the learning centres may take, it would be ensured that the community is fully involved in planning and implementation of the post literacy programmes, the ultimate objective being to organise the unorganised. Functioning of JSNs would be reviewed with a view to making them mere effective and ensur ing that they subserve the purpose for which · they have been set up. Where JSNs and other forms of learning centres co-exist, an effective linkage between the two would be established. into a mass movement and a programme of mobile libraries would be evolved and im plemented in consultation with the state governments. Facilities available through the Raja Ram Mohan Roy Library Founda tion and other institutions/agencies work ing in this area would be extended to the post-literacy centres, to the extent possible. j) For promoting reading habits, the learning centres would be encourag¢ to set up penfriend clubs, reader clubs, etc. Book. voyage will be integrated with post literacy programme at the local, district and state levels. · k) Government support to post-literacy programme would continue for a period of at least two years before the community takes it over for implementation on a long-term basis. 1) The employers, trade-unions and the govern ment departments/undertakings would be ex pected to provide facilities of reading rooms, libraries, etc. for the neo-literates/learners, and their employees/members, etc. The Central Board of Workers' Education would be in volved in organising learning centres for t'he workers in the industrial establishments. m) The National Book Trust, State Resource Centres, voluntary agencies and the privi;Ue publishers would be encouraged to bring out books of common interest to the learners at sub sidised rates. The educational institutions ·would be persuaded to allow the nco-literates to make use of the facilities of their libraries. n) The University Grants Commission would be involved organically and effectively in litera<;y and post-literacy movement by galvanising the entire higher educ:.tional system to discharge its social obligation. o) Radio, television and films would be used with creativity and innovative skills to encourage ef forts in the districts covered by the total literacy campaigns to sustain literacy, particularly read ing and numeracy skills. Specially designed audio-visual learning material would be prepared for use in the JSNs and post-literacy centres. Serials, particularly for the nco literates, would be developed and shown/brOad cast through TV/radio. p) Use would be made for extending local radio net-work being set up by AIR to design cur ricula in different vocational and other life skills 26 for the neo-litcmtes in the lLC districts. Radio programmes would be supported by print and other materials which may be prepared locally to cater to the particular needs of the area. q) All other avenues of learning of appropriate levels would be provided to the nco-literates, the ultimate objective being creation of a learn ing Scx:iety. r) Industry, trade, commerce and banks would be impressed upon the need to provide avenues for continuous learning to their employees, par ticularly the nco-literates. 8. SKILL DEVELOPMENT 5.8.1 Skill development would be integrated in each programme of post-literacy and continuing education. In particular, the endeavour of NLMA would be on achieving the following objectives in Close collaboration with other departments/agencies which will be requested to assume specific respOnsibilities: a) Enabling the nco-literates to acquire skills for economic self-reliance, such skills also includ ing managerial and entrepreneurial skills. b) Opening of additional Shraniik Vidyapeeths in urban, semi-urban and rural areas and promo tion of more agencies/institutions in the non formal sector for the purpose of imparting vocational skill information to the nco-literates and conducting such programmes. c) Enabling the educational institutions to start vocational courses for nco~ literates, without the educational qualification being a condition precedent for admission :n such courses, which could be run in the evening. d) Creation of enabling structures for working nco-literate women in the fonn of creches, day care centres, etc. by the village level agencies and other developemnt departments/organisa tions. e) Imparting skills like communication skills, sur vival skills and skills aimed at upgrading the functional capability of the nco-literates. 5.8.2 Based on the needs voiced by women neo-literates, wide range of interventions in terms of information sharing on availability of schemes/programmes, bank credit, ap propriate technology, marketing channels, availability of materials, etc. would be executed. With a view to enabling them to become self employed/better -employed, formation of cooperatives of women nco-literates would be facilitated. 9. RESEARCH 5.9.1 ~ibe. National Institute of Adult Education (NIAE) which has been set-up as a technically independent, ad ministratively autonomous, professionally competent and a ·highly specialised body with research and academic orien tation would undertake good quality action research on various a<~pects relating to adult education programmes of all descriptions. The emphasis in programmes and activities of NIAE would be on creative and innovative work and on collaboration and net-worl~ing with other agencies in India and abroad, working in the field of adult education. The other agencies/organisations interested in taking up such re search would also be encouraged to do so. 10. TARGETS 5.10.1 It is estimated that at the beginning of the 8th Five Year Plan tlle ·Dumber of adult illiterates in the age-group 15-35 was l 04 million. Whereas, 80 million adult illiterates would be covered by total literacy campaigns to be taken up in 350 districts in the country by the close of the 8th Five Year Plan, the remaining 24 million illiterates would be im parted literacy through programmes to be taken up by volun tary agencies, educational institutions, Nehru Yuva Kendras, etc. It would be the endeavour of NLMA to cover about 21 million persons in the age-group 15-35 in each year of the 8th Five Year Plan. 5.10.2 Where as persons in the age-group 9-14 would also be covered in the total literacy campaigns where the Sak sharta Samitis so propose, it would be ensured that after the first pha<>e of basic literacy in the total literacy campaigns, appropriate arrangement<; are made for learners in this age group so that they complete prescribed course of non-for mal education and acquire the minimum levels of learning prescribed for non-formal education. As the priority age group under NLM is 15-35, it would be difficult to make an estimation about the number of persons in the age-group 9 14 which would be covered under the total literacy cam paigns. 11. CONTINUATION OF THE MISSION 5. I 1.1 Launched in .May I 988 with the objective of impart ing functional literacy to 80 million illiterate adults by 1995, the NLM has now come to stay, and the need of literacy for improving the overall well-being of the illiterates and ena bling them to make an effective contribution in all proces ses of national development has been fully realised. The time span of National Literacy Mission was initially fixed upto 1995 so as to coincide with the terminal year of the 8th Five Year Plan (1990-95). Since, however, the 8th Plan could not start from 1990-91, as was originally planned, the time span of the Mission would be extended upto 1997 which would be the terminal year of the 8th Five Year Plan (1992-97).1L would be imperative to retain and strengthen, 27 if considered necessary, all the structures of the Mission at the national, state and district levels, as have already come into operation and which, with their combined efforts, have succeeded in covering 156 districts in the country by the literacy campaigns. 12. MONITORING AND EVALUATION 5.12.1 A detailed monitoring system to facilitate timely flow of information on the pace and progress in the im plementation of the programme from the field to the nation al level, which has already been evolved, would be made more effective in the light of the experience that may be gained for about a year or so. It would be ensured that both qualitative as well as quantitative aspects of the programme are monitored. 5.12.2 Evaluation under the NLM would be systemauc, simple and intelligible and technically sound. It would be participatory, supportive and non-threatening. The impor tant features of the evaluation system under NLM would be the following: a) It would provide basic information on the achievement of the literacy campaigns from the point of view of social accountability, provid ing feed-back to the organisers, securing politi cal support and injecting an awareness and respect for education in general and literacy in particular. b) Scores for competencies achieved in reading, writing and numeracy skills would be clearly defined. c) While conducting evaluation, the wide varia tions in regard to the rate of literacy in different parts of the country and the situation in which most of the learners are placed would be kept in view. d) The findings of the evaluation would be shared with the representatives of the people, learners, volunteers and all those who have worked for the campaigns. e) A manual on evaluation techniques, including design.of training modules would be prepared and a number of parallel tests would be evolved and indicated in the manual. 0 Well defined criteria would be evolved for the purpose of dec\aring an area fully literate. g) The literacy scenario in the country is charac terised by wide-spread disparity in both relative and absolute terms in respect of a State as also a district(s) between urban and rural areas, be tween males and females. It is quite likely that as a result or operationalisation or the TLCs, the position will undergo qualitative change result ing in substantial reduction of this disparity. Agencies undertaking evaluation studies in respect of n.c districts would be asked to reflect this in the evaluation study reports so 28 • that the. situation ~raining before the commen cement of the programme and after the con clusion of the programme could be known and shared with the masses.   
6. EARLY CHILDHOOD CARE AND EDUCATION 1. TilE PRESENT SnuA TION 6.1.1 The Natiooal Policy on Education (NPE) has given a great. deal of importance to Early Childhood Care and Education (ECCE). It views ECCE as a crucial input in the strategy of human resoun:e development (HRD), as a feeder port and suppM service programme for working for women primary of education tile disadvantaged and as a sup sec tions of the society. It has also taken into account the-holistic nature of ECCE and bas pointed out the need for organising programmes for &he all-round development of the child. It specifically focusses on the need f<r early care and stimula . tion of children belonging to &he vulnerable sector. Since the age span covered by ECCE is &om conception to 6 years, emphasis bas been given to a child-centred approach, play way and activity based learning in place of f<rmal methods of teaching and early introduction of the three R' s. The im portance of community involvement has also been high lighted. Emphasis bas been given to establishing linkages between Integrated C~ld Development, Service (I CDS) and other ECCE programmes. 6.1.2 The Revised Policy Formulations reiterate the pos tulates of NPE, 1986 on ECCE. The prescriptions of POA, 1986 continue to be of relevance. What is attempted here is to update the POA, 1986 taking into account the develop ments since then and. the need to strengthen the programmes by, inter-aliQ, improving the ~me components, co . ordination mechanism and enlisting community participa·· lion 6.1.3 in mobilising,resources, Realising the crucial planning importance and or monitoring. rapid physical and mental growth during early childhood, a number of programmes ofECCE were started particularly after the Na tional Policy for children (1974). The existing ECCE Pf9,grammes include; (i) ICDS. (ii) Scheme of assistance to voluntary orgaoisa tions for conducting Early Childhood Educa tion (ECE) centres. (iii) Balwadis and day-care centres run by voluntary agencies with Government's assistance. (iv) Pre-primary schools run by the State G~vern­ ments, Municipal Corporations and other governmental and non-government agencies. (v) Maternal and child be81th services through primary health centres and sub-centres and other agencies. 6.1.4 ICDS is currendy the bisges& pogramme of early :childhood development, with 2.90 lakb Anganwadis serv ing nearly 140 1akh children and abOut 27 lakh mothers; 91.5% ICDS projects are located in rural and tribal areas and 8.5% in urban slums. Besides the ICDS, by the end of 1991 92, there were 12,470 creches with a coverage of about 3 lakh children below 5 yeaAr, 4395 ECE centres in 9 Educa tionally Backward (EB) States and the Balwadi Nutrition programme serving nearly 2.30 .lakb children in the age group of 3.-5 years. 6.1.5 Over the recent years, a number of initiatives have been taken to malce the programmes more focussed. The measures under ICDS, include emphasis on practical train ing for Anganwadi workers, and ~xtension work by Angan wadi training centres; which are required to adopt 10 Anganwadis each for developing them as model Angan wadis. To build up resoun:e capabilities in the field, action is afoot to develop CDPO's offiCe into resoun:e centre. In structional maierials f<r Anganwadi Training Centres are also under preparation. Efforts are also being made to dis tribute education cum play materials to Anganwadis to im prove their pre-school education componenL Initiative bas also been taken to improve the scheme of c~bes by review ing n<rms for voluntary and community participation. A scheme bas been worked out by the Department of Women and Child Development for converging the services under DWCRA, ICDS, pre-school education and related schemes of the Departments of Health, Family Welfare, and Rural DevelopmenL 2. TARGETS AND PHASING 6.2.1 The aim of ECCE is that every child should be as sured access to the fulfilment of all basic needs. As such ef forts will be made towards universalisation ofiCDS by A.D. 2000. By the end of the Eighth Plan, 3. 75lalcb Anganwadi centres Anganwadi· would centres. be established Anganwadis and by will A.D.2000 be gradually seven con lakh verted into Anganwadis-cum-creches. By the end of Eighth Plan, 25 per cent of Anganwadis will be converted into An ganwadis-cum-creches. Qualitative improvement of ongo ing ECCE programmes would receive high attention. New cost-effective designs of ECCE will also be encouraged and supported. 3. STRATEGYOFIMPLEMENTATION 6.3.1 The ECCE involves the total development of child, i.e. physical, motor, cognitive, language, emotional, social and moral. The age span under consideration in ECCE is from conception to about 6years. Even a gtodest develop ment process during this period includes care of mother during pregnancy (ante-natal health check-up, nutritional support, control of anaemia, immunization for pNYeDtion   
of tetanus followingdelivery,etc.) hygienic and skilled birth attendance, nutritional care of mother during lactation. cor rect infant feeding practices, immunization of infant from communicable diseases, mothers' education in the child . care, early childhood stimulation, and health and nutrition al support throughout Thus, ECCE is a complex integral function. It requires workers with integrated ECCE training, integrated worksites or ECCE centres where the essential services flow to young children through the period of their growth and preparation for formal education. To tap the full advantage of the synergistic impact of well-integrated ECCE activities and associated programmes, efforts will be directed at coordinated functioning of various agencies  governmental and non-governmental  striving to meet different needs of young children. An Inter-ministerial Committee will be set up comprising representatives of Departments of Labour, Education, Rural Development and other related Ministries/Departments to plan, coordinate and monitor the programme. This will be done by the Department of Women and Child Development which will function as the nodal agency for ECCE programme. 6.3.2 Community and parental participation will be en listed wherever possible in resource mobilisation, planning and implementation. To this end village/mohalla level com mittees with adequate representation of mothers will be or ganised. The role of capable voluntary agencies will be emphasized to create a wide and rich network of resources for ECCE. At the same time, it is imperative that prolifera tion of sub-standard institutions of ECCE is discouraged. Norms and minimum standards will be devised. 6.3.3 Ongoing programmes/schemes that reflect a con cern for the holistic development of young children will be improved to provide effectively integrated services. These include: (a) /CDS: The following initiatives that have been introduced will be continued and strengthened : (i) Assigning each Anganwadi Workers' Training Centre the responsibility of developing at least 20-25 Anganwadi Centres so as to provide the trainees with adequate field practice. (ii) Placing trainees for a minimum of one month in the Anganwadis for practical training. (iii) (iv) Development of instructional materials for use of trainers and the trainees. Pmviding materials for children-picture books, picture posters, minimum essential play materials to all Anganwadis and replenishing them periodically. (v) Developing the CDPO's office into a 30 resource centre that is equipped with train ing materials. (vi) Coordinating the timings of ICDS Angan wadis with the primary schools wherever possible. In addition, efforts will also be made : (i) To orient trainers, supervisors and CDPOs through refresher courSes in pre-school educa tion component and through field training both at pre-service and in-service levels, (ii) to convene periodic workshops for functionaries of related programmes to op timise re.sources and strengthen programme linkages, (iii) to develop a small percentage of Anganwadis as day-care centres, and (iv) to effect convergence of services and functions of ICDS and other related schemes. (b) ECE Centres: The ECE Scheme, as it stands, does not have a component of nutrition; neither does it have any provision for the training of teachers. The following measures will, there fQre, be taken with immediate effect : (i) Adding nutrition component with parent/ community assistance. (ii) Provision for training the personnel. (iii) Supply of educational materials for childre.n. (iv) Using play-way method and discouraging early teaching of the three R • s. (v) System of monitoring. (c) Balwadis run by Voluntary Agencies: There are varieties of patterns in the Balwadis. Each scheme has iL~> own history and background. All programmes of child development imple mented through voluntary agencies will have an integrated approach, offering a comprehensive package and avoiding duplication. Where this does not happen, the existing activities will be merged in some comprehensive and integrated programme. Most of the programmes run by voluntary agencies do not have all the com ponents of health, nutrition and education. They need to be converted into total child develop ment centres. (d) Pre-primary schools and classes: They essen tially focus on education. Therefore, they re quire: (i) Adding C(llllponents•of nutrition with com mURity/pacml participati9f1. . (ii) Discuuraging ~ early introduction of the . three R's, ··(iii}··. Using play•way method. (iv) Developing a. re~onship between home and community: •. . . . . (v) I>iscouraging enttance tats (br admission. (e) Day Care Celllres: The creches.IIOd day-care centres nm wiili/without Go~Cii\ment support otherwise need to be review~ and strengthened 011 an immediate basis. The foHowing require ments will be ensured: (i) Timing oo~~inus with school working hours or mother's working hours (ii) .\dequa~. Safe andhysienic space (iii) Adequate child _worker ratio (iv) Safe drinking water ·(v) ·Supplementatyniltrition (vi)·. ParamediCal ap-e .under medical supet . vision · · · (vii) Minimum . eqJiipment including li~ ~ · crad~s. (viii) Toys and play materials (ix) Training and superv~jqn of ~qrke{S. 6 .. 3.4 B~. st.rens}hening cptisting. RfOgramrnes, em phasis during ~ Ei&hth Plan .-rid thereafter.will also be on experimentation{(){ evolving low cost and. cQQ~~ s~if~e models. Tbe models .which are iR experimenta"qp St&Jes.at the moment, would ~ encouraged and expanded. Ap propriate agendes'wiil'iindenake a survey ohuch models. Some of the models which-~ alie8dy being experimented with; which have' mucb )'II'OIBise are. as tallows : (a) Ho~ Bastd Model (from conception to 6 years): This model involvesdeveloping tech· •niqueJ,of stimulafion.·that ,can be taught to parents orotbermembersof1hefamily to foster child development. It requires (i) training of lo.cal wome~.-who ~ill play the leadership role in conducting bonie visits and encouraging family ~~cmb~r!:> to .conduct stimulation programmcsfortheir,hildrcn, (ii).development of low cost play materials to be used by the family, (iii) development of audio and video progmmmes for the mass' media for wide im plementation, and (iv) creation of a mobile su . perviso~ cadre. 6-XX I M " H RDI9~ 31 '. .·. (b) Day-care Cenues .(from, b;rth to 6 year.s): 11Us . DlCldeJ ~.a.supPon:JFI'Vice ~0 rree older cblldfen ; a,ml.worting WOIJX'O. S~ VOIURW)' Ofganisa tions are successfully .impJegtenting. these programmes. Such Day-care Centres should be established at all work sites where women • . em,plqy~ ~ su~ntiaiJJJI,D,Jlber& While sup port,!()~' v.~lJ.!~~ agen~~ should be provided on a liberal. sc~e by 09VCf11DlCill the eK}leRtti .. lure on the ~U'e,$ run Qn 'work sites should be ~ resix>nsi~ility oftbe employezs. (c) Family Dq.cfJTe Ctmr~s: This is best suited Jor areas whett the target group is very small and a Day•Care Centre tDay (){ may not be vi able. In this model, a suitable woman from the same group is identified as the home-care worker, and given the necessary ·materials, uaining, supervision. and infrasll'UCtural sup port, including food, to lake care of five or six children in her own home .. It i.~envisaged that everyclusterofabout 10 home care units woold be;supervJsed,Juided ~supported by a super ,,, visory worker who is competent to give the necessary support. 6.3'.5 ··Keeping in mind the rote of ECCE as a supPort ser vice iri Universalisation -of Elementary EduCation (UEE), as well as for HRD, ECCE will continue tobe·diiectoo to ihe most under:-privUedged groups •. those who are stilt outside lho.mainstream of formal ~00,. Sople of.these can be defined as follows: 'i) Very pocl' urb8Ti slum communities; · ib ~cologically dePrlved ai'eas where chilwen are · reqliired to fetch· fuel, fodder, water and do other ·household chores; . . . 'f. iii) family,Jahour and :household chores in rural areas and artisan households; iv), ionenmt, orseasonallabom; who have a mobile " and ttansientlife-style, like road workers: . v) ~onstruction workers in ~ural and urban areas; vi) landless agricultural labour, vii) nomadic communities and pastoralists; viii) forest,dwelfers and tribals in remote areas; ix) residents of remote isolated h~tmiuL<>. Girls in these groups mav require ·• upport services like C'hild cart>, SO!il'''',,,. i: v•:ry small ur•ts. Special atten ·tion should bC given t0 ~chcduled casles and scheduled tribeS iil all the abOve defined categories. . 6.3.6 Appropriate linkages will also be developed be tween ECCE; primary schools and No~Fonnal Education   
(NFB) Cenlres. Two-way inralction between the Angan wadi WOlken ad school teiCbeniNFE insii'Ucton will be encourapcJ.. Suitable space will be provided for ECCE close to primary i.Choots. Media 63.1 Media support will be developed and fully utilized forconveyinal}theparentsandcommunitythesipifiCIDCe of ECCE. It is eQually necessary for the training of person nel in ECCE. A~ should aiiO be paid to the develop ment of stimuladng propnmes for children. Cancened eft'OIU will be .... by all concemed orplisltions such u Dqordarsban, ~. NCERT, NIPCCD and other related or pDisations in developing IOftware in all major rcgionallan IUIIes. 4. PERSONNEL 6.4.1 Crucial to the 111CCe11 of any propamme is mobUiz ing an adequate nUJ!iber of 'WOlters, desiping suitable in centives to sustain .their motivation towards work and equipping them fat etriCient funcdbning through proper training. Since ECCE JII'OII'IIDIDCI aim notjusl at providing custodial care. but inida&ing developmental processes, the workers forte would need to be suitably auamented in ac cordance with the divene componentS of the programmes. 'l'hij wUl require an improvement in chUd-worker ratio, wherever feasible. 6.4.2 WorldnacondidonaofBCCB functionaries will allo need aaendon, e8p0Cially in eenna of adequlle honor'lrW remuneration. EtTona wiD be condnued to see lha& in C. of day-caae cenllel, the nnunendon of fuU time worken is not less than the ........ by unskilled workers. The lana term goal would be to bring the trained full-time child CII'O workers on par with primary achoolrucbers. Pan-time child care workers should be paid not leas than minimum waaea proportionate to lheir hours of work. To ensure proper suporviaion, l'llio of aupervilon to the number of ECCE Centres should be improved. Conaiderina the nature of work, which Rlquirea rapport with mOiben and tender nesatochildren,ECCB wortenand theirsupervilors sbould preferably be women. · S. 1RAINING 6.5.1 In all models of ECCE programmes, the component of training will be sb'engthened. Training would include a strong component of field placement under supervision. As the early childhood care and education programmes are bound to expand considerably over the next two decades, corresponding training facilities will be available for all levels of functionariq. Following would be some of the im ~t ~eters ~or meeting the lraining requirements: • <~ Initiating· 1"7lwo-year vocalional course in ECCE at +21evel with the objective of creating 32 baste skills Which can later be adoplied through job lraining for specific aituadons; • Strengthening the educational content of ICDS functionaries training by providing appropriate trainina inputs, raources, mareriala crc., and extendina it, where possible, to include a com ponent on day care.  Review of the existing training JJIOII'II1Uile of ECCE.  Working out flexible modelS for day-care lrain ing at fteld level.  Taking stepS for letting up a hiaher coune in ECCE for senior level functionaries of ICDS, trainers in the mous training instilutions and the superviay personnel;  Creating a system of accreditation of training instilutions dealing with BCCB. 6.5.2 Greater technical reaomce suppon to ECCE proanunmes need to be pven through NCBRT/SCERTI/ SRCs and DIETs. DIETs should play a pivotal role for tech· nical resource suppon to BCCB programmes and functionarlel in key nas lib trainiq, curriculum develop ment transaction etc. These institutions should be ltl'elllthened with nec:es.-y infraaii'Uctures and reaoun:es . to equip them for this. Resource capabilities of NOOa and V.As will allo be drawn upon. 6. C0NTBNT AND PROCESS • 6.6.1 The content of pre-acbool prolflmme should provide inputs for a tolal development of child faculties. · 1bis would mean providin& compo~ataofhealth, nutrition . and eclucadon. Illustratively, thole would include : ' .  replar medical ~ of children with fol low up and refenal services where necessary  daily provision of supplemena.y nutrition in accordance with the nutritional status ot children  Qrowth monitoring through maintenance of height and weight through monthly/bimonthly 'records • Child centred, and development and process • oriented play activities planned in a manner to expose children to a variety of experiences that foster a sense of joy and curiosity  Promote language skills and cognitive curiosity  Foster joy and creativity and confidence  Promote muscular development 6.6.2 Daily activities-should be planned according to the age and developmental levels of the children. There should •• ' be a flexible balance of activiUea for all aspects of develop ment as well• a balance between individual and group nc Uvities, indoor and outdoor acUviUes, vigorous and quiet acUvities and guided and free activiUes. 6.6.3 Medium· of communication should be mother tongue/regional language. There should be a link between the mother tonp and the dominant language of the region. 7. REVIEW 6.7.1 With a view to improving the quality of ECCE, a comprehensive reView of the existing Eq:;E programmes will be undertaken with special emphasis on pre-school cur riculum, teacbing/leaming maaerial, training including is sues of accreditation and vocationalisaUon, moniiOring and linkages with primary _schooling. It is impezative to dis courage prolifeiation of substandard instiwtions of ECCE. Norms and minimwn standards will be devised with a view to ensuring better quality and healthy practices. 33 8. MONITORING AND EVALUATION 6.8.1 The system of monitoring and evaluation will be strenghtened on the following lines: · .. " (i) A Management Information System will be evolved for monitoring all ECCE programmes. Information will be collected, compiled, analysed and acted upon at the blockllocal authority level. The flow of information to dif ferent levels (District. Stale, Centre) will be so planned that control funcUons at these levels can be performed effectively without delay. (ii) Profession2l institutions and expert bodies will be involved in independent, objecUve evalua tion that can identify gaps and problems and feasible alternatives for remedial action.   
li• 7. ; ELEMENTARY ' ' ~ ' : . EDJ]CATION 'J' 0 _· • : ~.   
1. THE SI1UATION. AS IN 1986 7 .1.1 Provision of free and compulsory education to all children until they complete the age of 14 years is a Direc tivePrincipleoftheConstitution.Sii'lce 1950dt-1.erminedef forts have been made towards the achievement of this goal. Over the number the years and there spread has m beeR institutions avery impressive as-Weft 'as enrolment increase in Universal provision of institutions has been substantially acbievedat the Primary sfage(classelli~V)Acc::ording to the Fifth All India Education.SQCVey. 1986,94.5% of the rural population had school$ within a walking distance of 1 Km.; 83.98% of the rural populatioo wa1>. served with middle schools/sections within a walking distance of 3 Km. The number of primary schools increased from 2:10 lakhs in 1950-51 to 5.29lakhs in 1985-86. Similarly, the number of upper primary schools went upto 1.35 lakhs in 1985-86 as compared to 13,600 in 1950-51. The gross enrolmentof6 11 age group increased from 43.1% in 1950-51 to 62.4% in 1960-61 to 76.4% in 1970-71 to 80.5% in 1980-81 and to 85.0% in 1985-86. Likewise, the gross enrolment of 11-14 age group increased from 12.9% in 1950-51 to 22.5% in 1960-61 to 33.4% in: 1970-71 to 41.9% in 1980-81 and to 48.9% in 1985-86. 7.1.2 However, Univcrsalisation of Elementary Educa tion (UEE) in its totality is still an elusive goal and much ground is yet to be covered. Drop-out rates continue to be significant, retention of children in schools is low and wastage considerable. In 1985-86, drop-out rates were ~7.6% in classes I-V and 64.4% in classes I VIII. Despite · mcreased participation of girls, disparity still exislc;. Though the participation of girls in primary ed~JCalion (classesiV) increased from 28.1% in 1950-51 to40.2% in 1985-86, it was still below the normative percentage of about 50%. The participation of girls in upper pri:nary classes (classes VI VIII) waslower; it increased from 16:~% in 1950-51 to 35.1% in 1985 86. The participation of SCs and STs is now more or less in proportion to their share in population at the primary level, but the sex disparity persists among SCs and STs. In· classes 1-V, SC girls account for 37.5% of SC stu dents and in classes VI-VIII 29.9% (1985-86). The cor responding percrntages of ST girls are 36.6% and 30.4% respectively. 2. NPE, 1986 Ai'lD ITS POA 7 .2.1 The NPE, 1986, and its . POA gave unqualified priority to L'EE and introduced many innovations. First, the emphasis was shifted from enrolment perse to enrolment as ~ell as retention. As the POA, 1986 put it crisply "enrol ment by itself is of little importance if children do not con tinue beyond one year, many of them not seeing the school f-. ·for more than a few days." Secondly ,the NPE; 1986 soug!lt ~ tiased adopt on micro-planning, an. arrcty of meticulob81y and applied fonnutated at the grass roots strategies level all over tht countty, to ensure children •s retention at school. POA, 1986 sought to replace enrolment drives by participa tive planning in which the teachers and the villagers would fomuUare family-wise andchikl·wisedesign of action to en ~ that every <:hild regut8rly auended school or llon-for llW edu¢atioll· centte and completed at least five years of schooling I~ ~ised or ils non-formal tbat~ve equivalent. Sdlobl Thitdly, e.Mronment, the NPE, un satisfactory·condition t>f buildings and insuffiCiency of in• structioRf11 material. fllltCtiOh as denmtivating factorS for chii<Wri and their parerus~ 1'he·Po1iey; the!W'ore, called for a drive for a substantial improvement of primary schools and provision of support services. To this end, the scheme o~ this Operation scheme has Blackboard greater significance was conceived. in that The it was launching a manifes of tation of the Union's intent to shoulder its share of resposibiliti~s i_n this vital area of national life, a respon sibility arising from Ed~JCation being in the Concwrent List. .. Fourthly, the NPE, 1986 commended the adoption at the · ··. primary stage of a child-centred and activity-based process of learning. Fifthly, the NPE, 1986 and its POA postulated a large programme of restructuring of teacher education, pre-service as well as. in-service, the details of which are spelt out in Chapter 22 of this document Last but the most important, the NPE; 1986 sought to address the most dif ficult aspect of acce~. viz:; access to education of millions of. girls and working . children who, because of socio economic compulsions, cannot participate in school system. As rightly pointed out by the NPERC, it was for the flfst time, in 1986, that an educational policy had admitte-d that the sch~l would not reach all children and that a large and systemauc programme ofNon-Formal Education (NFE) has to be an integral component of the strategy to achieve UEE. NFE, as envisaged by the NPE, 1986 and its POA, would have enough flexibility to enable the learners to learn at their · own pace and at the same time would have quality com parable with formal education. 3.. DEVELOPMENTS SiNCE THE NPE, 1986, AND . ITSPOA 7.3.1 Most of the directives of NPE-POA, have been operationalised by the Union and StatesiUTs. The number of primary schools has increased from 5.291akhs in 1985 86 to 5.58 lakhs. in 1990-91; and the number of upper primary schools has increased from 1.35 lakhs to 1.46lakhs during the same period. The details of the increase in gross enrolment ratios are given below: Gross Earobnent Ratio . 1.986-87 1990~91 Total Enrolment Classes I-V Girls 79.21 85.97 Total 95.96 101.03 Classes VI-VIII Girls 38.95 46.13 Total 53.14 60.11 SC Enrolmelll Classes I-V ,Girls 64.8 80.6 Total 84.8 102.2 Classes V-VIII Girls 26.5 33.3 Total 40.0 47.7 ST Enrolrru!lll Classes I-V Girls 68.0 78.6 Tot31 90.1 103.3 Classes VI~ vm Girls 21.9 27.5 Total 34.1 39.7 The drop out .rates declined from 47.61% in 1985-86 to 46.97% in 1987-88 ,in respect of classes I-V and from 64.42% in.1985-86t062.29% in 1987-88ofclasses I-VIII. However, the data for subsequent years is not available, whiCh is an indication of the weakness-of the data collection system; 7.32 . Non-foroud education~ become an accepted al ternative chafiriel for.'children who. cannotauend full-time •, ' :".'. ' .·· . . ' schools. The~ sche~ was revised in its content and em phasis in 1987-88. · Although its focus is still on. the ten edueation3Ily backward States~ namely, Andhra Pradesh,. AriJnacluil Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir, MadhyaPJ'adeSh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, it covers utban slums, hilly, tribal and desert areas and areas with concentration of working children in the other States as well. Financial responsibility is shared by the Central and State Governments in the ra&io of 50:50 for co educational centres aDd 90: 10 for girls' NFE centres. Assis tance to the extent of 100 percent is provided to voluntary agencies for running NFE centres for experimental and in novative projects.·The number· of NFE centres increased from 1.26lakhs in 1986 to 2.72lakhs by March, 1992 and the enrolment from 36.45 lakhs to 68 .. lakhs. During this period the number of girls' centres has increased f~m 20,500 to 81,600. In this programme, over 390 volUntary agencies also have participated and have been sanctioned grant-in-aid under the scheme of Non-Formal Education since NPE, 1986. Alongside, 50 pxperimental and Innova tive Projects and 19 District Resofirce Units have alSo been sanctioned for iiHiepth worlc· in NFE. · 35 7 .J;:J By March, 1992, Operation Blackboard covered 4.14 lakh (77%) schools in 5385 (84~) Community Development Blocks and 1142 (294) Municipal areas • Owing to resource constraint all the primary schools of the ' country could not be covered as envisaged. About 70,000 (46%) teachers have been appointed as against 1.52 lakh single tea:her schools identified for coverage. Over 1.00 lakh (43%) class rooms have been constructed as against the target of 2.39 lakhs. 7.3.4 Following the guidelines in the National Curricular Framework, the NCERT revised the entire school syllabi and brought out revised textbooks for classes I IOXii. Based on the National Curricular Framework and the NCERT syl labi/textbooks, the States and Union TerritOries have also undertaken measures of curricuhim renewal and develop ment of new textbooks for different stages of school educa tion for their introduction into the school system in a phased manner. 7:3.5 · Guidelines for operationalising microplanning bave been prepared and distributed to the State Govern ments. The concept of micro planning and local level capacity building have been given currency and efforts launched to decentralise educational planning and manage · ment vide new schemes or experimental projects. 1be · resulting impact of these measureS is expected to be felt during the coming years. 7.3.6 A positive externality, rather unanticipated. of the Total Uteracy Campaigns, ~ been that in many districts covered by the campaign there has been an upsurge in the demand for primary education. In quit.e a few districts "out of school" children in the age "group 9-14 was covered by the campaigns. Further, in these districts the awareness generated among parents is leading to better participation of children in primary schools. This happy experience has reconfirmed the need to pay more auention to the "demand side" in strategies for achieving UEE and highlighted the need for a disaggregated approach to the pioblem of UEE whereby districts, not States, and specific disadvantaged groups  the girls of SCs and STs  should become the basis for future planning. 7.3.7 Significant developments have taken place in the area of Ieamer achievement The NPE, 1986 spells out Min imum Levels of Learning (MU.) and state-d that "to promot.e equality it will be necessary to provide for equal opportunity to all not only in access but also in the condition for success. Besides, awareness .of the inherent equality of all will be created through .the core curriculum .... Minimum Levels Learning will be laid down for each stage of education." In pursuance of this policy and based on the report of a Com mi~appointed by the Ministry in 1990 and therecommen ~ns of the CAB'-, MLL have been laid down for the primary stage with d'te intention of rerlucing the curriculum !   
load a making it more relevant and functional for those children who have no support for Jtaming at bolile or out side lhe sc:hool. who ..e not likely to avail eX the opportunity of education beyond Ibis stage and who must learn here what is required to susaain them throughout their lives and enable them to function in their world as socially useful and con tributing individuals. It is now acknowledged that UEE can not be accepted as having been achieved unless chilc:ken passing out of school acquire MLL; achievement . .._ come to be assigned equal importance alongwith access and reten tion. 7 .3.8 AnOther important devel.ent was lhe World ConferenceonEduca&ion fCll' All (EFA}held in March 1990, in Jomtien, 1baiJand. 1be Confere. was organised by UNESCO, UNICEF, UNDP and the \Vorld Bank and at tended by 155 member states of United Nations system and sevezal donor agencies: The Conferene adopted a declara tion calling upon all member states and international agen cies to take effective stepS for achieving EPA by the year A.D. 2000. 'I'ite'Conference advocated a holisdc concept of basic education in lieu of a sectoral approach segregating sections like primary schooling, Non-formal Education, Adult and Continuing Education in separate compartments. In ordec to harness increased donor interest in the basic education, as a result of the Conference, it was decided to formulate comprehensive basic education projects in educa tionally backward States. The framework for availing exter nal assistance for basic educatiOn was evolved at the 46th meeting of the CABE held on 8-9 March, 1991 and reiterated in lhe47th meeting oflhe CABE held on 5-6 May. 1992. 7.3.9 CABE considered the failure to universalise elementary education and literacy as not only of a question of lack of resources but .also of systemic deficiencies. The additionalresourcesthatmaybeavailableunderexternalas sistance should, therefore, be used for educational reconstruction which should_go beyond the conventional measures such as opening new schools, construction of school buildings and appointing teachers. It is necessary to adopt a holistic approach, and to address i) the educational needs of the working children, girls and disadvantged groups, and ii) issues of content, process and quality. Projects should be ilso ·used to dev~lop sustainable and replicable models in different programmes related to basic educ&tion. Therefore, these projects should be developed and implemented in the ttue spirit of meaningful participa tiorl between the Centre and States as envisaged in NPE. It would also be necessary to implement these projects in a mission mode with effective and participative management structures and with involvement of local community, teaciKn and NGOs. 36 7.3.10 Two such externally assisted pojects, viz., the BiharEducationProjectwilhUnescoasislanceandlheLot Jumbish Project in~ wilh the assisaanc:eofSwedisb International Development Agency have been launched. The CABE flll'th« decided that project formulalion should be a process of capacity building. 4. REVISED POLICY FORMULATIONS 7 .4.1 While reiterating the priority for UEE as well as the policy frame outlined by NPE, 1986, the Revised Policy Formulations (RPF) brought about foDowing modif'x:a tions: i) Achieving essentialle"Ve!s of learning has been specifically incorporated as One of the thrust areas in para 5.5; this is a logical consequence of the increasing importance that came to be at tached to MLL aloOgwith access and retention. ii) ScoPe of Operation Blackboard (OB) wai en larged to provide three mtsonably large rooms and three teachers in every pimary school; it ·was also decided to extend OB to the upper primary stage. iii) It was specifically laid down that at least 50 per ·cent m the teachers recruited in future should be women. iv) Taking a realistic view of me enormous t& of achieving UEE in its entirely (access, retention as weD as achievement), the RPF envisage that free and compulsory educ8tion of satisfactoey quality should be prOvided to all children upto 14 years of age before the commencement of the twenty-fust century. v) Taking note of the effectiveness of the Mission mode in social sectors, particW.ly literacy ,lhe RPF envisage launching of a national mission to ensure the achievement of UEE by the year 2000. Disagrepted Taraet Settina and Decenttalised PlaDnlag 7.4.2 · Inlhe8thPlanthestrategyfor envisagesadop tion of di:mggregated target setting decentralised plan ning. An analysis of the educational · · reveals that within each State, even in the ed ly backward ones. there are areas and districts which I almost within reach of universalisation, while even ih the educationally ad vanced States there are districts which are stiR quite back ward. The attempt would be to prepare district-specific, population-specifiC plans for UES within the broad strategy frame of Microplanning through people's participation and introduction of Minimum Levels of Learning (MIL) in schools to improve learner achievement. Microplanning   
wiD provide the framework for u~iversal access and ooiver sal parlicipadon while MLL would be lhe scraregy frame fOr universal achievement. 7 .4.3 In order to. reduce disparities a disaggregated ap proach will be adopted through diSirict planning by class ifyini distticts into four categories: i) Hip literacy districts in which access and en rolment .-e almost ooiversal and community awareness for education is already high; ii) total literacy campaign distticts in which com mooity mobilisation for educational needs has been successfully generated by lhe National Literacy Mission; iii) low literacy districL, in which lhe provision of education facilities is unsatisfactory and lhe delivery system functions witbout any com munity involvement; and iv) exremally assisted project distticts with a dif ferent manage.ent structure and sufficient finlnc:ial support. . 7 .4A The strategies with regard to access, participation, achievement, environment building, community ,participa tion, etc. will be different for the fc:m c:ateaories of districts. 7 .4.5 . Un«* this broad sarategy of district planning and based on the experience gained in implemenlation of NPE, and the RPF, the following strategies are propoaed: i) Adoption of alternative channels of schooling like volootary schools altd NFB cencres for thole who cannot avail of conventimal full  time schooling. ii) Microplanning through involvement of teachers and the community in orda' to design and implement a farnily-wl,te, child-wise plan of action for ooiversal access/enrolment and participation. iii) Makingparentsawareabouttheirresponability for ensuring the completion of elementary education by their children and for JI'OViding at home the facilities and ODCUOI'IIement needed for this purpose. iv) Establishment of linkages between program mes of pre-school and primary education, and between programmes of literacy and· UEE, in total literacy compaign districts. v) Improvement of school facilities through revamped Operation Blackboard and connect ing it to MLL strategy. It will alsq be extended 10 upper priniary stage. vi) DecentralizatiOn of educational manasement 37 for making the schools function so as to ensure ooiversal enrolment, retention and achiew.. menL vii) Introduction of MLLs at primary and upper primary stages including coverage of die DOll formal education channel. viii)' Revision of process and content 9f elementary education to mate teaching-learning child centrtd, activity based and joyful. ix) Introduction of continuous n ~ve evaluation with focus on remedial measures. x) ModifiCation ofteachertrainingprogrammes in view of changed strategies and programmes. xi) Improvement of the monitoring system for UEE. xii) Launching a National Million to achieve lhc goals envisaged in there~ policy. 7 A.6 Further efforts would be made 10 dovelop dilliict specific projects, wi&h specirac actiVities, clemy def'med responsibilities, def'mite time-schedule a specific tarpll. Each district project will be prepared within ibe major strategy framework~ ~II be tailored to the specific needs a possibilities in the Clistrict. Apart from effective UBB,. the pis of each project will include the reduction of exist ina dis.,..-ities m educational access, the provision of alter-. native systems of comparable standards to tbe disadvantapd groups, a subsratial imJI'Ovement in the quality of schooling facilities. obtaining a pnuine com munity involvement in the running of schools,llld buildina up local level capacity to ensure effective decentralisation of educational planninJ. That is to say, the oveiall goal of the project would be rec:msuuction of primary education u a whole in aelectecldistricts instead of a piecemeal implmen tation of schemes. An integrated approach is more likely to achieve synergies among differentprogrammecomponeniS. 5. PROVISION OF UNIVERSAL ACCESS 7.5.1 Existirig schemes wiD be suitably niodified and measures will be taken 10 incorporate the new policy for mulations. a) Formal Schooling 7 .5.2 New primary schools according to the norms, will be opened in unserved habitations. NFE centres will be opened in smaller habitations and for children who cannot benefit from the school system. In addition, a new scheme of Voluntary Schools will be launched to achieve universal access for children in diffuent areas. 7.5.3 Primary Schools : In 1986, it was estimated that lhere were app-oximately 32.000 habitations with a popula tion of 300 or more that required primary schools. Though   
many new achools.have beenopened. new habitations have also come intO existence, and.it is estimated lhal35,000 new schools will be required. These schools will be opened by the State Governments following the norms specified under Operation Bl8ckboard. 7 .5.4 Upper Primary Schools : In order to inc;rease enrol ments at. the upper pri1118JY stage, the infrastrcl!lre at this stage will be expanded. Tfie existing nonn of providing an upper pririwy ·school within 3 km. walking distance is generally inconvenient for girls. This norm will be relaxed and. the new ratio between primary and upper primary schools will be 2: 1. Action will be taken in tbe next S years to upgiade every se<:ond primary school to the upper primary leveL It will be primarily the responsibility of the State Governments to observe this norm for school-map ping. 7 .S.S In order to achieve UEE the schoolsystem wiU have to cater to &bout 18 crore children. This calls for increasing the number of teachers from the present 27lakhS to 45 lakhs based on the teacher puptl ratio of 1:40. The increase in stu dent populaCion would also require an additional 11 lakh class rooms to be buik in the next 7 years. (b) Scheme qt Volntary Schools 7 .5~6 A new ·scheme of Voluntary Schools wiD be launchc4l.to cater .to the needs of neglecd, hiUy, tribal and difficult aras where there is no provision of schooling; 'ntis scheme will enable wluntary agencies to conduct schools for UPEIUEE and· stimulate community participation in planning and conducting schools in a locally appropriate manner. 7 .5.7 n., Voluntary Schools would be organised to serve all tichool children in a given village/habitation. Areas would be well defined with a pap~on of not less than ISO so • the Volun&ary School has at least a minimum of 30 childreft. Voluntary Schools would be expecred 10 completC primary/elementary ~ucation of the required level in a specific period adeqUate for the pupils 10 master the cur riculum. Learners enrolled in the Voluntary Schools may appear as ex~mal students for entry into any class of full· time formal school. Local teachers will be appointed to run the schools and adequate training will be provided to them. Supervision of the Voluntary Schools would be th~respon­ sibility of the Village Education Committee (VEC). 7.5.8 A system of momtoring and evaluation will be designed by ihe grant-giving agency to periodically evaluate the work of the school on the ba~is of I've; main criteria--enrolment, atl!:.ndance, retention. achievell}ellt of minimum levels of: leanung, and community involvetnenL 7.5.9 Central assistance will be given to the eligible Voluntary Agencies to run the schools. 38 (e) PrOJI'••• eiNoa·FormalEdueatloq · · 7 .5.10 In order to strengthen tilt NFB Scheme' the fOllow~ ing strategies will be adopted: i) Provision of NFE cenlteS will be based on the · Microplaiming excercise Clrried out for UEE. NFE centres will invariably cater to the needS · .ofchildren. especially girls. who are not able 10 or who cannot..OO the formal ·school. ii) The community will be involved iri the seuing up, and supervision of all NFE,cenues. iii) The NFB instruc&on wiH be identified with the help of the community. Special efforts will be made to appoint women illstructors wherever possibe •. iv) · Tg_ining ofNFE personnel, especially instruc toil, will be given top priority. Adequate train ing and re-orieribltion will be provided. v) Training responsibility will be shared by the project, District level institutions like DIETs, DR Us, State level institutions like SCERT, and National institutes likeNCERT and NIEP A. vi) ProjeCt administration wiD be Slrengthened for effective decentalisation of management. . Nec:eaay administrati¥C and management in pats will be provided at tho State and Districts levels. vii) Arrangements will· be made for testing of c:llildren iD the NFE stream .with teference to an ·equivalent srage ia lhe formal system and specific instructions :isllled to faci ~~tate lateral entry into the formal sys~.for stUdents of the NFE stream. · · viii) .Bffons will.be made 10 link non•formal courses with the Open Schools. ix) The NFE programme will be linlced with the Klleme of public libraries, Jana Shiksha Nilayams, etc. x) Iii total literacy campaign districts follow-up ptogramtnes will betaken up for children in the age-group 9-14 10 go beyond NLM literacy norms. This will form a part of the post literacy and continuing. education programme of the district. xi) Vocational and technical courses of wide variety will be provided for children and youth who. pass out o:f the Non-Formal stream. Sbnunik Vidyapeeth and Voluntary agencies will be involved in dlis process. xii) Voluntary agencies will be encouraged to un dertake projects of NFE, especially in areas where the formal school systc.m is not able to meet the demands of UEE. 7.5.11 It is proposed that in the revised scheme, the fol lowing financial pattern will be fcllowed : a) Assistance to State Governments for setting up and running non formal centres (boys and girls) on 75:25 basis; b) assistance to State Governments for setting up and running non-formal education centres ex clusively for girls on 90:10 basis; c) assistance to voluntary agencies for setting up and running non-formal education centres on 100% basis; and d) assistance to academic institutions· and volun tary agencies for taking up innovative projects and research and evaluation activities in the field of non-formal education on 100% basis. 7.5.12 Pupil evaluation in NFE will be centre-based and related to the Ml.L. For project evaluation techniques and methodologies will be evolved by the various institutions concerned in the implementation of NFE, i.e., NCERT. SCERT, DIET, DRU, etc. Monitoring of NFE will be centre-based. Models already developed will be used for monitoring. (d) Microplanning. 7.5.13 Microplanning is a process of designing "a family wise and child-wise plan of action" by which" every child regularly attends school or NFE centre, continues his/her education at the place suitable to him/her, and completes at least 8 years of schooling or its equivalent at the non-formal centre." A revenue village would be ideal for specific plan ning; however, microplanning for UEE may be carried out at the Block, Taluk, District levels. Within this area the steps by which this micro level planning will be operationalised are: i) The Village Education Committee and similar participatory structures at Block, Taluk and District levels. would play an important role in ' operationalising micro-planning. ii) Mobilising community participation through environment building activities such as jathas, street plays, folk songs, etc. iii) Ascertaining educational requirements of the areas through a family-wise survey to be con ducted with the help of the community. iv) Bringing to school all children who can be en rolled, and providing NFE centres or other in 7-RRl M/o. HRD/95 39 novativeandsupportiverhannels for those who cannot go to school. v) Ensuring that all children, speCially girls and SC/ST children, regularly and actually par ticipate in elementary education. v) Planning for the improvement of schools or NFE centres so that effective learning takes place. vi) Reorienting and strengthening local level ad ministrative and resource support systems. vii) Decentrcllising educational administration. viii) Integrating all the schemes being implemented in the area which would contribute to the im provement of school system (e.g. Operation Blackboard, JRY, ICDS, Social Forestry, Health Check-up etc.). · 7.5.14 In most of the total literacy campaign (TLC) dis tricts, a positive environment has already been created for taking up Microplanning Projects. Many District Literacy Societies who have launched the 1L(;s have shown k~n in terest in elementary education and some of them have sub mitted project proposals under Microplanning to the MHRD. The initiative shown by these societies needs to be encouraged. DIETS/SCERTS and voluntary agencies will also be involved in the implementation of this programme. 7.5.15 Micropl;mning can be effective only when there is total integration of efforts and resources  human and financial  from all quarters. While centrcllly sponsored schemes OB, JRY, NFE, etc. will provide the major share off unds for improving school facilities and access, th~ State Governments will provide resources for opening new schools. Additional resources required for survey, environ ment building, training of VEC members. etc. will be provided by the Centre under this scheme. 7 .5.16 Microplanning will be made operational in about 20 project areas on an experimental basis during 1992-93. Based on the experience gained during the course of im plementation it will be expanded !O cov<'r about l 00 districts during the 8th Plan. In due course the c 'd.:rc country will be covered, thus ens uP • •6 j· .. versa! access and enrolment, and universal retenti.:m. (e) Operation Blackboard 7 .5.17 The scheme of Operation Blackboard was launched in 1987 inpursuanceofNPE-POA, to provide minimum es sential facilities to all primary schools in the country. 7.5.18 Externalevaluationoftheschemehasindicatedthat lack of training of teachers in using the teaching material, specification of a large number of uniform facilities to be provided without modifici.ltion according to local needs and lack of provision for breakage of equipment have been some of the drawbacks of implementation of the scheme. 7.5.19 In order to operationalise the Revised Policy For mulations, the modified OB will contain the following three sub schemes: .i) ·continuation of ongoing OB to cover all the remaining primary schools especially those in SC/ST areas;· ii) Expanding the scope 01 OB to provide ~ teachers and three rooms to primary schools wherever enrolment warrants them; and iii) Expanding OB to upper primary schools to proyide (a) at least one room for each class/sec tion (b) a Headmaster-cum-ofnce. room, (c) separate toilet facilities for girls and boys, (d) essential teaching learning equip~t includ ing a library, (e) at least one teacher for each class/section and (f) a contingency grant for replenishment of items, consumable and minor repairs, etc. 7.5.20 The following measures will be taken to improve the quality of implementation of OB : i) Teachers will be trained in usiq theOB teach ing materials under a specially designed teacher training progrimme. ii) State Governments will mako provision fat breakage and replaceinent of equipment. iii) Enough flexibilitY wiD' be provided for pur chase of teacliing leatning materials rclovans "' the curriculum and the local needs. · iv) At least SO% of the teachers appointed will be ~01~en. This will have a positive impact on garls enrolment and retention. v) Wherever Micro-planning projects are taken up OB will form an integral partofMicroplanning. vi) As far as, possible low cost and locally available designs relevant to the local conditions will be adopted for school buildings. Nirmithi Kendras (Building Centres) and local teachnical in stitutes will be associated in this endeavour. 7.5.21 As in the past, Central Government will provide funds for equipment and teachers' salary for the plan period. The State Governments will mobilise resources under JRY and other schemes for construction of school buildings in cluding Headmaster-cum-office room and toilet facilitles. The State Governments will also provide contingency and replacement funds for equipment. 7.5.22 Ongoing OB will cover aU schools by 1993-94. Other two sub-schemes will be started in the second half of 40 the 8th Plan. 4'\bout 30% of the eligible schools wiD be provided three rooms and three teachers under the expanded OB by tho end of 8th Plan and the remaining schools will be covered by the year A.D. 2000. Under the expanded OB a limited number of upper pri1118Q' schools wiU be covered during the 8th Plan. Depending on the availability of funds, all upper primary schools will be covered by the year A.D. 2000. 6. CONTENT AND PROCESS (a) National Curricular Framework 7.6.1 ·The Na&ional Policy on Education. 1986 envisaged a National System of Education based on a National Cur ricular Framework containing a common core along with the academic components. The NPEIPOA eriviSf1ged a child-centred approach to education to promote universal enrolment and univtnal retantion of childreil upto 14 years of qeand sUbstantial impiovement in the quality of educa tion in the school. In pursuance of NPEIPOA, the National Council of Educational R~h and Training (NCER1) brought out in 1988 a National Curricular Framework for all.stages of SChool education. The revised curriculUm took lhtO account the need for reduction of curriculum load, keep ing in view th~ requitements for modernisation and relevance. 7 .6.2 Following the guidelines in the National Curricular Framewod.:, the NCERT revised the entire sehool syllabi and brought out revised textbooks for classes I to xn. Based on the National Curricular Framework and the NCBRT syillbi/textbooks, the State and Union Territories have also undertaken measures of curriculum renewal and develop ment of new textbooks for different stages of school educa tion for their introduction into the school system in a phased manner. (b) t.o.l or the School Bag 7 .6.3 The tendency on the part of some schools, par ticularly in urban .areas, to recommend a lafge. number of books, has contributed to overburdening of students. The Ministry of Human Resource Development requested the State GovemmentsiUTs to insttuet the schools not to prescribe more books than necessary. 7 .6.4 Of la~. concern has been expressed in various forums, including both Houses of Parliament, about the ill creasing academic burden, particularly at the junior classes in schools. The whole question of curriculum load is a com plex one and there are no simple solutions. It has to be tackled in a comprehensive way and would include cur ricular reform, examination reform, ~tter pedagogical practices and teacher training. NCERT has given the guidelines but a more concerted effort to adopt them needs to be made by the State Education Departments, the SCERTs, the Boards and other educational bodies. Keeping in view this concern, the Government have appointed a Committee under the chairmanship of Professor Y ash Pal, Ex-Chairman of the University Grants Com~ission, to devise ways to reduce the academic burden on school in a. time bound manner. The report of this Committee is awaited. (c) Minimum Levels of Learning 7.6.5 The need to lay down Minimum Levels of Learn ing (MLL) emerges from the basic concern that irrespective of caste, creed, location or sex, all children must be given access to education of a comparable standard. The MLL strategy for improving the quality of elementary education is an attempt to combine quality with equity. It lays down learning outcomes in the form of competencies or levels of learning for each stage of elementary education. The strategy also prescribes the adoption of measures that will ensure achievement of these levels by children both in the formal schools as well as NFE centres. 7 .6.6 The focus ofMLL strategy will be the development of competency-based teaching and learning. The main steps by which MLLs will be introduced in school will be: i) Preliminary assessement of the existing levels of learning achievements. ii) Modification of the MLLs to suit local situa tions, if needed. iii) Initial and recurrent orientation of teachers to competency-based teaching. iv) Preparation of teacher training handl..ooks for MLL-based teaching. v) Introdution of continuous and comprehensive evaluation of students and using· evaluation results for remedial action. vi) Preparation of unit tests and other evaluation materials and putting them in an item JXX?l for using as an.d when required. vii) Using MLL norms as and when c.:.rriculum and textbooks are revised; and viii) Provision of competency based teaching-learn ing materials to. make the educational process activity based and joyful. 7.6.7 Periodical and systematic programme of perfor mance analysis will be carried out to ensure improvement in the quality of education. Efforts will be made to involve the community in this process. 7 .6.8 Based on the experience gained in implementation ofMLL projects sanctioned during 1991-92, the programme will be expanded to other areas in a phased manner. SCERTsJDIETs will be encouraged to take up MLL projects 41 so that this strategy becomes an integral part of pre-service teacher training. Project area teachers will be trained in utilising the teaching-aids supplied under Operation Black board. MLL concept will also be introduced in teacher train ing institutes/colleges for pre-service training. The immediate task is to lay down MLLs for upper primary stage. A committee will be set-up at the national level for this purpo~. 7 .6.9 At the national level, the MHRD will continue to play a major role. A network of Resource Centres will be identified to assist the Ministry in training, development of instructional and evaluation material, documentation, etc. At the state level Department of Education and SCERT will take the responsibility for implementation. A national pool of resource persons drawn from various educational institu tions wiN be created. A similar pool at the State level wilt also be set up. Arrangements will be made for reorientation of these resource persons for effective implementation of MLL strategy. 7 .6.1 0 While Cental Government will provide the funds in the initial stages when the strategy is implemented in a project mode, the State Governments, at least by the end of 8th Plan, will adopt this stategy as an integral part of their responsibility towards quality improvement of elementary education. 7. LAUNCHINGOFNATIONALMISSION 7.7.1 The Revised Policy Formulations provide for launching of a National Mission for the achievement of the goal of UEE. This being an important and immediate task, suitable mechanisms will be worked out to identify the ob jectives, strategies, functions, structure, etc. of the proposed National Mission. In this process wide consultations will be held with the State Governments, voluntary agencies, educational and social institutions, educationists, women activists, etc. The proposed Mission will have the cenl.al ob jective of mobilising all the resources, human, financial and institutional, necessary for achieving the goal of UEE. 7.7.2 The Mission will be made operational during the. year 1993-94, when all centrally sponsored schemes such as Microplanning, OB, NFE, MLL for quality improvement, etc. will be transferred to the Mission, so that implementa tion of UEE at the State, District, Block and village levels can be operated through the Mission mode. 8. MAKING THE SYSTEM WORK (a) The Policy 7.8.1 NPE, 1986 suggested that education needed to be managed in an atmosphere of utmost intellectual rigour, seriousness of purpose and, at the same ~me, of freedom es sential for innovation and creativity. The Policy also en visaged that discipline be introduced into the system with immediate effect The policy put it in simple words that for . the system to work all teachers should teach and all students should.study. 7 .8.2 NPE, 1986 also suggested the following strategies for making the .system work: i) a better deal to teachers with greater respon sibility; ii) provision of improved student services and in sistence on observance of acceptable norms of behaviour; and iii) provision of better facilities to institutions and creation of a system of performance appraisals of inStitutions accGrding to standards and norms set at the national or State level. (b) Proposed Action / 7 .8.3 While any insistance on imposition of rigid unifor mity or martinet discipline will not be in consonance with the general tenor of NPE, and the process to be followed in creating the new educational order has to be participatory, it is incumbent upon us to develop a clear approach to this crucial task. The essential aspects of this task are the follow ing: i) The functioning of the school administrative set up will be ~tudied to fmd out the difficulties in herent in the system: The school administrative set up will be made alen and responsive so that they can correct the defects in the system. The people involved in educational administration will be trained and motivated to make the sys tem under them work by inspiring the teachers and students. NCERT, NIEPA, SCERT and DIETs will intensify their training programmes for educational administrators for this purpose. ii) People will be involved in the process of educa tion in their surroun•iings. This could be done through microplanning. This will ensure teachers' accountability to the society and · community's aecotlntabilities to the sehool sys tem. iii) Steps w1H-be'taken to improve the working en vironment of the teachers. Teachers and teachers' representatives will be involve.d ·in planning and implementing the educational schemes at various levels. They may be made members of Committees at different levels set up by the Govellllilent for the review of the progreSs made in the education depanment schemes. iv) Greater autonomy will have to be given to the teachers to manage the affairs of the school. 42 v) ·Students will be provided basic amenities such as drinking water ,toile-ts, sports equipment, etc. vi) Students eligible for scholarships and other in centives should receive them in time. vii) Minimum basic facilities should be provided to all primary and upper primary schools under the scheme of OB. viii) Central and sta,te organisations such as NCERT, NIEPA, SCERT, etc. will determine critria for assessment of performance of elemeatary education schools. An incentive scheme may also be worked out for the schools and com munity in order to motivate them to achieve the goal of UEE. This inay be done at the block and district levels. · 9. MONITORING AND EVAUATION 7.9.1 With targets of UEE given separately for ~ess. panicipation and enrolment, it will be necessary to develop a monitoring system that yields timely and reliable informa tion with which to monitorenrolment,retention,completion and achievement. At present the system of data collection depends upon a manual collation of data at the block and dislrictlevels. Apan from time-lagS' in the compilation of data, this process restricts monitoring to the main indicators, due to which data essential for the monitoring of internal ef ficiency such as net enrolment figures, age-wise break-up of students, dropout ratios, transition rates, etc., are not ob tained. In the 8th Pian, efforts would be made tocomputerise the data collection system at the district level, introducing user friendly software developed under the COPE project of ~"'EPA and giving computer training to district and block education staff. Data will be entered and stored in computers in each district office, and the NICNET used to transmit it to the state and national levels. A scheme for computerisa tion of educational stati~ics has been introduced but this needs further streamlining. A Cell for Monitoring of UEE can be set up at the State level. The computerisation at dis trict level will begin in phases, taking 4/5 districts in the fll'Sl year and gradually replacing the manual system with the computerised system till by the end of the 8th Plan, thC en tire system is computerised. The data base will be gradual ly expanded, so that information relevant not only to monitor the interal efficiency of the educti9J181 system but also for rnicroplanning and to improve and inform the dis trict management functioning, can be obtained. 7.9.2 In addition to quantitative data, the qualitative monitoring of achievement will also be introduced. The Na tional Evaluation Organisation (NEO) set up to assess the learning acquired by children at the end of the primary and upper primary stages will yield data fa, this purpose.   
7.9.3 Reputed agencies, NGOs, NCERT, NIEPA, SCERT, etc. will be engaged in the external evaluation of the programme. 43 8. SECONDARY EDUCATION   
1. PRESENTSI1UATION (a) Access 8.1.1 The NPE, 1986laid down that "access to secondary education wiU be widened to cover areas unserved by it at present." There has been a significant increase in the num ber of secondary and higher secondary schools and in enrol ment during th~ period from 1987-88 to 1990-91. During this period enrolment at secondary stage increased by 16.8 per cent and at the higher secondary stage by 17.6 per cent. The number of secondary schools increased from 54,845 in 1987-88 to 59,468 in 1990-91; corresponding figures for highersecondaryschoolsare 16,460and 19,151 respective Jy. The tatio of secondary and higher secondary schools to upper primary scho.olshaddeclined from 1:1.98 in 1987-88 to 1: l.86 in 1990~91. 8.1.2 · Gender disparities in enrolments are significant. In 1990-91 girls accounted for 33.4% of the enrolment at the secondary stage and 32% at the higher secondary stage. The SCs and STs also lag in regard to enrolment. Thus, SCs ac count for 11.85% at the secondary stage and 9.7% at the higher secondary stage; corresponding figures for STs are 4.21% and 3% respectively. (b) Structure 8.1.3 Though a considerable degree of uniformity has been achieved in regard to common education structure of 10+ 2+ 3, there is a considerable diversity regarding the loca tion of the + 2 stage. In quite a few States it is not part of the school'system. (c) National Curricular Framework 8.1.4 The secondary Stage is divided into two very dis tinct sub-stages  secondary ( upto class X) which is the stage of gen~ education and higher secondary (classes XI and  XII) which is marked by differentiation and diversification. The National system of education, as stated in the NPE,1986 envisages a National Curricular Framework. Such a framework has already been prepared for the secondary education though its implementation has been uneven. The work of curriculum revision for the secondary stage was un dertaken in almost all the States and the Union Territories ({ITs). TheNCERT also prepared the guidelines, syllabi and textbooks for all stages of school education. For the higher secondary stage, however, the Curricular Framework has not yet been authorised. The NCERT had developed a draft document in 1988 but that document requires to be reviewed keeping in view the emerging concerns. However, several States used the draft National Curricular Framework for the higher secondary stage prepared by the NCERT. (d) Facilities for Qualitative Improvement 8.1.5 The POA, 1986 specified programmes for provid ing adequate playgrmmd facilities, construction of addition al classrooms and provision of laboratory facilities, as specified in terms of norms developed by various organisa tions. Although no systematic studies have been conducted to assess the progress of diversification of courses at the higher secondary stage, improvement in curriculum, the tex ~ tual materials, teaching practices, examination/evaluation methods, and for the improvement of pre-service and in-ser vice training programmes, there is a general feeling that the progress has not been marked. 2. POLICY CHANGE 5.2.1 The Revised Policy Formulations take note of the increased demand for secondary education and go beyond NPE, 1986 by calling for a planned expansion of secondary education facilities all over the country. Secondly, they call for higher participation of g·irls, SCs and STs, particularly in science, vocational and commerce streams. Thirdly, they call for reorganisation of Boards of Secondary Education and vesting them with autonomy so 'that their ability to im prove the quality of secondary education is, enhanced'. possible Eourthly, so they that envisage thC children that secondary are equipped level with institutions necessary as computer skills to be effective in the emerging technologi cal world. 3. BROAD PARAMETERS OF THE STRATEGY ENVISAGED 8.3.1 They include:  Extending acct:ss to secondary education by setting up new schools in the unserved areas and by. extending and consolidating the existing facilities, with particular emphasis on ensuring substantially increased enrolment of girls, the SCs and the STs.  Progressively bringing in the higher secondary stage (and all its equivalents) as a part of the school system in all States.  Formulating a National Curriculum Framework for the higher secondary stage as well as development of new curricula and instruction al packages based on the semester pattern.  Reviewing and revising the curricula of secon dary education (classes IX and X). Implementing a comprehensive scheme of ex amination reform. • lmP,iovjng considezably the physical and in ~ facilities in secoqdary and higher aecondaty schools. .. Providing for diversity of courses in higher · secondary"schools. ,.. Reviewing afresh the existing system of pre service teacher education for the secondary stage and formula&ing and implementing an im proved teacher education system.  lnstitulionalising in-service teacher uairiing.  Transforming the role of the Boards of Secon dary Education,  Strengthening the academi~ institutions and bodies concemed with research .and develop ment in the areas· of cmriculwn, instructional materials and equipment for secondary sr.hools. 4. WIDENING ACCESS TO SECONDARY EDUCATION 8.4.1 The following steps are envisaged: i) As a short term 111C8SW'e, the State Oovenunents would be advised to povide in existing institu tions necessary facilities for a diversity of cour ses, including science, commerce· and vocational~· They would also be advised to immediately Initiate services for locating un served lreas and open High (i.e., Secondary) Schools in unserved areas taking the block as a unit so that the ratio of Secondary Schools to Upper Primary schools is not lower than I: 1.86. The distance of the existing schools from the unsened habitations will be duly considered. Special emphasis will be laid on opening schools in backward areas, areas inhabited predominantly by the SCs and the STs. ii) As a medium and long term measure, the programme of School mapping in each State for locating schools on the basis of clearly defined ndnns and standards will be revised. This exer cise, to be carried out by NIEPA in collabora tion with educational authorities in the States, will be completed by the end of 1994 and a proJra~~UDe to fully serve the unserved areas will be completed by 2000 A.D. In this exercise the 'educational needs of girls, SCs and STs would receive special consideration. iii) The StatesiUTs will be urged to formulate a special enabling plan to elisure increase in en rolment of girls, the SCs, the STs and other educationally backward sections. Necessary guidelines to formulate the planlmechanism 45 will be developed by the NCERT in consult ation with the education authorities of the States/tiTs. iv) The educational needs of.those who fmd it dif ficult to attend full-time school and for the working people who.have missed the secondary school will be met by extending and strengthen ing the Open School system. · 5. COMMON EDUCATIONAL STRUCTURE 8.5.1 In order to ensure that during the Eighth Plan period. a common educational structure of school education, that is, 10 (5+ 3+ 2) +2, is established throughOut the country, the following steps ~envisaged: i) Asap immediate step, StatesiUTs that have not yet switched over to the national common educational structure will be urged to see that every new school which is opened follows the 10(5+3+2)+2 structure. States/UTs that have already initiated the process of bringing the + 2 stage into the school system will be urged to in tensify the effort in this regard. ii) A task force will be set up to work out the modalities in consultation with the educational authorities of States/tiTs, for solving the dif ficulties and problems of switching over to the common structure. 6. QUALITATIVE IMPROVEMENT AND FACILITIES 8.6.1 The key issues in secondary education, apart from access,~ quality, modernization and diversification. Stan· dards regarding minimum facilities such as classrooms, sanitary facilities, science laboratories/equipments, libraries, etc., will be evolved by the NCERT in consultation with the BoardS ot.School Education and similarly norms in respect of number and qualifications of teachers Will also be laid down. The States and UTs, and Boards of Secondary Education would be advised to enforce these norms. Taking into consideration the past experience that the equipment once given is not replaced and even maintained it is sug gested that community participation by way of student con tribution at the rate ofRs.lO to Rs.15 per month should be levied, except from girls and others exempt from payment of tuition fee. This collection should remain in the school for replacement and maintenance purposes. States and UTs will conduct surveys from time to time about the facilities available in schools so that they can plan· their school im provement programmes on sound database. 1bese surveys will also be meshed with the All India Educational Survey. 7. STRENGTHENING THE ROLE OF THE BOARDS OF SECONDARY EDUCATION 8.7.1 The Boards of Secondary Education occupy a key position as they prescribe the courses of study, prescribe/ recommend and, in some SUltes prepare textbooks and other instructional materials, lay down the standards of achieve ment of students, and 'pass judgement on the quality of per formance of the learners at the secondary stage'. A number of other institutions at the national and state levels such as the NCERT, the NIEPA, the SCERTs, the Directorates of School Education, etc., also play im important role in strengthening secondary education. While the mutual intez action and collaboration among the various institutions working in the area of secondary education will be strengthened and institutionalized, the role and functions of the Boards will be redefined to enhance their ability to im-. prove the quality of secondary education. This would re quire, a greater autonomy for the Board and strengthening them in terms of th~ir structure and composition. 8.7.2 The much needed examination and evaluation reform will require the Boards of Secondary Education to · play a greatez role in improving and monitoring the quality of secondary education. The Boards will also be expected to play a central role in enforcing the norms with regard to academic and infrastructural facilities in secondary educa tion. 8. 7.3 A Task Force will be set up to study the existing position and status of the Boards throughout the country and to draw up a scheme to transform the Boards into effective instruments for bringing a~ut qualitative improvement of secondary education. The T~ Force would have due rep resentatiOn to the States/UTs, State Boards of Education and other institutions concerned. This Task Force will submit its report by March, 1993 and the States/UTs will be advised to implement its recommendations within the Eighth Plan period. 8. PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMMES FOR HEADS OF SECONDARY/ IDGHER SECONDARY SCHOOLS 8.8.1 Suitable. programmes for Heads of Secondary/ Higher Secondary schools will be designed to facilitate the effective implem~tation of the reforms·outlined above. 9. CONTENT AND PROCESS 8.9.1 The programme of reorientation of content and process needs to be worked out separutely fqr the two stages of Secondary Education, viz., the secondary stage (classes IX-X) and higher secondary stage (classes XI-XII). This is because in terms of both content and process, the two stages are very different While the former is a continuation of, and forms the concluding stage of general education, the latter 46 marks the beginning of differentiation and diversification. There is a much clearer understanding of nature.of educa tion at the secondary stage than at the higher secondary stage. The National Curricular Framework visualized as a basis of the National system of Education in the NPE has been formulated and programmes for implementing it have been carried out by the educational authorities in alniost all the States/UTs. However at the higher secondary stage, as mentioned earlier while a draft of the curricular framework was prepared in consultation with educational agencie§ and organizations and experts throughout the country, its accep tance as a national document cannot be said to have been achieved. It was not even printed forwidecirculation though educational authorities in many States/Lis have used it in varying degrees in their programmes of reorienting the con tent and process. Many issues relating to the modernization of its structure and content, imparting it a greatez degree of relevance and its transaction and evaluation are related to the question of semesterization recommended by the NPE. 8.9.2 At the secondary stage of education, where knowledge areas become increasingly important, the con tent and process of education has to undergo continuous reorganization and upgradation. Though, ideally, various learning experiences based on the school curriculum should make an integrated whole, they have to be classified under various subject areas for the sake of convenience. The plan ning of objectives, learning activities and strategies under each curricular area have to. be further guided by considera tions such as the requirements of the various stages of educa tion and the developmental stages of the learners. Secondary Stage 8.9.3 TheNCERT, in 1988, broughtoutthen.r:dified ver sion of the National Curriculum/or Elementary and Secon dary Education  A Framework in the light of the major thrusts and recommendations, including the core curricular areas, of the NPE. It dealt with various aspects of the reorientation of content and process of education a~ a whole and in various subject areas up to the secondary stage. This Framework formed the basis of the Guidelines and Syllabi as well as textbooks and other instructional materials in various subjects brought out by the NCERT. According to the Framework the content of secondary education which is the terminal stage of general education will be built around the following curricular areas:  Languages (mother tongue, Hindi, English)  Mathematics  Science  Social Sciences (History, Geography, Civics, Economics)  Work Experience  Art Education  Health and Physical Education 8.9.4 Languages: One of the major thrusts in the Frameworlc was the effective implementation of the Three Language FormuJa. It recommended the study of three lan guages before the child completes her/his Secondary Educa tion with one language  the mother tongue/regional language  to be studied from the primary stage to the end of the secondary stage and the study of the second and the third language from the upper primary stage to the secon dary stage. 8.9.5 Mathematics: The secondary stage (Classes IX-X) marks a beginning for the transition from functional math ematics studied till the upper primary stage to the study of mathematics as a discipline. The logical proofs of proposi tion, theorems, etc. is intrOduced at this stage. Apart from being a specifiC subject, itshould be treated as a concomitant to any subject involving analysis and reasoning. 8.9.6 With the recent introduction of computers in schools, educational computing and the emergence of learn ing through the understanding of cause-effect relationships and the interplay of variables, the teaching of Mathematics will be suitably redesigned to bring it in line with modem technological devices. 8.9.7 Science: The ahtrof teaching science at this stage is primarily directed towaals.pteblem-solving and decision making through the learning of key concepts which cut across ~the disciplines of scl$1ce. The content of science should be organised on the basis of two guidelines, namely  contemporary science and the learning ability of the pupil. It should reflect that science is a continuing human en deavour and that it is international in character and method. 8.9.8 The instructional materials il}-science based on the Framework will be reviewed to enstfre that the approaches followed are in consonance with the objectives of science education as laid down in the policy, viz., to develop in the child well-defined abilities and values such as spirit of in quiry, creativity, objectivity, courage to question, and aes thetic sensibility. Learning of science will be oriented to ensme that the learners discover the relationship of science with health, agriculture; industry, and other aspects of daily life. 8.9.9 Social Sciences: The Framework recommended that social sciences at the secondary stage may comprise ele ments of History, Geography, Civics and Economics to promote an understanding of contemporary India. The general framework of objectives of teaching social sciences at this stage had three major components. These were: (i) deepening the pupil's understanding of contem porary India and its social, economic and politi caldevelopmentasanindependentnauon,and 8-881 M/o. HR0/9:'i 47 its composite culture; (ii) developing in the pupil a world perspective and ' an understanding of the problems of the con temporary world, particularly those relating to international peace and human rights and the .es tablishment of a just world order; and (iii) inculcating in the pupil a spirit of enquiry, a scientific and forward looking outlook and aversion to injustice and bigotry. 8.9 .10 Art Education: The Fr:amework defined the aim of art education up to the secondary stage as sensitization of the learners so that they may learn to respond to the beauty in line, colour, form, movement and sound, and knowledge and understanding of tlle cultural heritage. 8.9.11 Work Experience: The Framework visualized Work Experience 'purposive and meaningful manual work, organized as an integral part of the learning process and resulting in either goods or services useful to the community' as an essential component ilt all stages of education. Its introduction through well-structured and graded programmes comprising activities in accordance with the interests, abilities and needs of learners was recom mended. The Frarneworlc also laid stress on the inculcation in the learners respect for manual work, values of self reliance, cooperativeness, perseverance, helpfulness, in· quisitiveness, work ethics, attitudes and values .elated to productive work, and concern for the community._ For the secondary stage, the imparting of a pre-vocational orienta tion to the programme was recommended to facilitate the choice of the vocational courses at the higher secondafy stage. . ~. ~. 8.9.12 Health and Physical Education: Health and physi cal education was visualized as an integral part of education up to the secondary stage. The Framework laid emphasis on the total health of the learner and the community by promot ing desirable attitudes, understanding and practices with regard to nutrition, health and sanitation and developing health, strength and physical fitness of the body through games and sports activities, yoga, scouting, guiding, N .C.C ., social service, etc. 8.9 .13 . Education in V aloes: Jhe Framework emphasized value education as an integral part of school curriculum. It highlighted the values drawn from national goals, universal perception, ethical considerations and character building. It stressed the role of education in combating obscurantism, religious fanaticism, violence, superstition, fatalism, ex ploitationand injustice as well as the inculcation of values like honesty, truthfulness, courage, convictiQn straightfor wardness, fearlessness, tolerance, love for justice, depend ability, compassion, etc. for creating a humane society and balanced individuals. The Framework paid particular atten ~ tion to the values specified by theNJ>.E as tbe core curricular . ·. I ... elements. Efforts were made to integrate dlo various com ponents of value education into the curriculll}ll at all stages of school education, including the sec00:dary s~e. 8.9.14 Population Education: The NPE specified obser vance of the small family norm as one of the core curricular elements at all stages of education. This has been sought to be achieved through the population education programme. C::::onten~...relating 10 population education have been in tegrated into the syllabi and textbooks of Geography, Economics, Civics, Science, and Languages at the secon. dary stage. These con~ts have been drawn from areas like population ana·~ea')nomic development, social develop ment, environment, health and nusrition, family life and population dynamics. These contents are related to six major themes, viz., Family Size and Faritily Welfare, Delayed Marriage, Responsible Parenthood, Population Change and Resource Development, Population-related Values and Beliefs, and Status of Women. Higher ~ec:ondary ( +2) Stage , ,;' 8.9.15 The Senior Secqndary (+2) Stage is a crucial stage of school education as 'after this stage students become eligible to compete for professional courses to be future en gineers, C,Chnologists, doctors, teachers or for pursuing academic courses at the tertiary stage. A large number of them also join the world of work. Therefore, it is at this stage that students are to be exposed to the struoture of individual subject disciplines such as Physics, Chemistry, Biology, Mathematics, Geology, History, Geography, Political Science, Economics, Sociology, Philosophy, Psychology, Languages and Arts. J 8.9.16 The conftJtltofeach subjeCt has to take into account the recent developments in the subject in as much as they are relevant to the +2 stage, and providing aU the needed foundations in each subject so that the needs of the different professional c~ and the other areas of their further education can be Diet with in reference to these subjects. Strategies 8.9.17 The implem~ntation will broadly cover the follow ing: (a~ Orientation of content: (i) Semesterization and General Education: Fol lowing the recommendation of the NPE, the NCERT's curriculum in various subjects at the secondary stage was organized in the form of semester courses. However, as the secondary stage in the 10+2+3 structure is a part of the stage of general education with undifferentiated common courses for all, the semester pattern at this stage has the limited meaning of the division of courses for purposes of transaction 48 and evaluation, and not for diversification of the curriculum. There cannot be any provision for options and electives at this stage nor for the in troduction of different levels of courses. While the organization of cowses on semester pattern for purposes of transaction and evaluation, in cluding continuous and comprehensive evalua tion, will be pwsued, no departure from the national! y accepted policy of general education upto the secondary stage will be made. (ii) Implementation of the National Curricular Framework: The implementation of the Nation al Curricular Framework upto the secondary stage throughout the country wiU be pursued. Status studies will be carried out by March, 1994 to monitor the implementation, particular ly of the core curricular elements, and remedial steps will be taken, in consultation with the educational authorities of States/UTs, wherever necessary. Particular emphasis will be laid on the implementation of the Three Language For mula. The task of identifying Minimum Levels of Learning (MLLs) for the secondary stage will also require to be undertaken both in reference to the essential competencies which cut across different subjects and also the knowledge base of the subjects. (iii) Modernization of Curriculum: Though the major thrusts in the NPE in its revised form are reflected in the National Curricular Framework, the curricula in various subjects will be ex amined for any deficiencies and inadequacies and for its modernization keeping in view the increased emphases on some issues of major concern, advance in knowledge and pedagogi cal considerations. The NCERTwill be advised to initiate the necessary changes in the cur riculum before the end of the Eighth Plan period. Special attention will be paid to strengthening the programme of education in values to make it more effective as well as the programmes of population education. (iv) The National Curricular Framework: for Higher Secondary Education will be finalised at the earliest The NCERT will be asked to complete it by the end of March, 1993. An important fea ture of this Framework will be the semesteriza tion of Higher Secondary education. This Framework will reflect the increasing impor ' tance of knowledge base in various subject areas as well as the essential competencies which cut across all subject areas. The NCERT will also develop guidelines, syllabi and in   
49 i'' 'r , structional f packages in the light of the Cur E~minatioqs ~eform: ricular Framework in a phased manner. The educational authorities in the States/UTs will be advised to initi~ the implementation of the . new Framework before the end of the 8th Plan period.  implementation o~ continuous, com prel\~,rtsive evaluation  ~r~~O~) of teach~~t· the new evalua tiOn te~mques · . • · ( v) The present progress of evaluation of textbooks from the standpoint of national integration will be ments extended as well to a.s include elements the core relating curricular to Interna ele tional Education. This would form a part of the monitoring of the implementation of the Na  Establishment of Educational vice (ETS) : ' (c) Strengthening ~ ofl'eclthical ., .. Supplk~ystem: Strengthening of existing i~~tillitions training " Testing Ser of teacher  tional Curricular Framework at all stages of school education.  Linkages and networking with university · deparunenL<> The main emphasis will be on:  Development of CTEs/IASbs as effective sup:. (i) Revising the syllabi and instructional materials in wherever the light necessary. of the revised policy formulations, (li) Study of State level curriculum materials from the standpoint of implementation of the NPE thrusts. port for inservice education of secondary teachers (d) Use ofET:  Development of Communication Technology for improving classroom transa<;tion (iii) Semesterization of the +2 stage curricula and  Educational Radio/TV development of exemplar materials.  NV Cassette service (b) Orientation of Process:  Computers for interactive learning (i) Redesigning of pre-service teacher education 10. SPECIAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR TALENTED curriculum to suit the requirements of Secod CHILDREN dary Education; design of pre-service teacher education programme specially relevant flJr +2 stage teaching. 8.10.1 There an!'t#llented children with pronounced cpm petence in particular·fields, which may be accompanied by indifference in certain other areas. Therefore,io11T81lgements (ii) Reorientation of inservice teachers on periodic for such students cannot be fitted into regular courses of basis. study. Special arrangementS for such students will have to (iii) Special training programmes for in-service teachers in subjects like the following for which the facilities are generally inadequate:  Work experience provide teaching/learning on modular b,asis for every small group of students in a small number ofsubjects of interest to them. Such arrangements will be characterised by better facilities, higher teacher-student ratio and regular participa tion by professionals in teaching programmes. A detailed  Art Education proposal for this purpose would be wortod out within one  Health and Physical Education year, by a specially constituted group. "' The term 'higher secondary' used in this report refers to all post-secondary (high school, class X) and Pre-Degree educa tion and includes Higher Secondary of the 10+2 pattern, Pre-University (One year course) Pre-Degree/Pre-University (Two year course) and Intermediate Junior colleges. """ The issues relating to computer literacy, vocationalisation of education, Navodaya Vidyalayas, Open Learning Systems, Examination Reforms and Teacher Training, though linked with secondary education, have not been discussed in this Chapter. These have been discussed in chapters 19, 10, 9, 12,21 and 22 respectively.   
9.NAVODAYA VIDYALAYAS 1. PRESENT SllUA TION 9.1.1 Since 1986, Nav<XIaya Vidyalayas were set up in 280 disuicts spread over 29 States and Union Territories for childre~ who are potentially high achievers, regardless of their socio-economic background. The POA envisaged es tablishing a Navodaya Vidyalaya in each district before the end of the 7th Five Year Plan, but this objective could not be achieved for want of sufficient resources; moreover, the three State Governments of Assam, Tainilnadu, and West Bengal did not accept the schemes, although the Assam Government has accepted the scheme subsequently. Neverthless, although all its objectives could not be achieved, the Nav<XIaya Vidyalaya scheme achieved a sig nificant degree of success and popularity. which is reflected in the demand for more Nav<XIaya Vidyalayas. 9 .1.2 The POA envisaged that the Nav<XIaya Vidyalayas would make available good quality education irrespective of the parents' capacity to pay and their socio-economic background. The Navodaya Vidyalaya Scheme has achieved aeertain measure of success in.regard to this ob jective. According to a survey made in 1989,40.7% of stu dents ~longed to families below the poverty line; 16% of the students were fJTSt generation learners. Stpdents are selected on the basis of an all India test of an objective type which is intended to be as culture-free as possible, ·and designed to gauge potential rather than academic achieve ment The academic results of the"Samiti have generally been better than those of other groups of schools affiliated to CBSE, including private schools. 9.1.3 The Nav<XIaya schools largely are intended to cater to rural talented children (for whom 75% seats are reserved) with reservation for SCs and STs. This social objective has been achieved to a great extent. In the Nav9daya Vidyalayas, 77.45% of the students are f~pm rural areas; ' 20.35% from SCs and 10.76% from STs. Girl students are 28.44% of the student population as against the target of 33%. An important feature of the scheme is the migration of a proportion of the students from one region to ·another, promoting national integration by providing opportunities to talented children from different parts of the country to live and learn together. 9 .1.4 The provision of accomm<XIation and other equip ment and facilities is severely constrained by the paucity of financial resources. This\is likely to affect the credibility of the scheme. Again, a shortage of personnel at all levels, par ticularly of teaching staff, is likely to affect standards if not rectified. 2. REVIEW OF THE SCHEME 9.2.1 The scheme was reviewed by the NPERC and by the JRC. While the NPERC was unable 10 reach any defmi&e conclusion, the JRC recommended continuation of the scheme as originally envisaged s~;~bject to tbe folloft'ing: a) Constant review to keep the scheme as cost Cf-• fective as possible; b) Ensuring of appropriate the ~dmission the modifacatiOR continued..validity test by periocJic of admission evaluatiQa.and and reliability J*a:e dure~ · c) More particular attention to the pace-setting role of these institutions. The Co.mmiuee alsO observed the need to think of the future course of the scheme. 3. STRATEGIES 9 .3.1 Keeping in view the considerations oudined by the JRC, the following strategies will now be adopted. (i) Coverage: The objective will be to cover·aD districtS in States accepting the scheme before the completion of the 8th Plan Period and prefeiably in the .next duee y~ This will mean opening about 50 NavOdaya Vidyalayas every year. (ii) A revised strategy for construction to minimize costs which meshes the long-term reconstruc tion plans with a need based short-term plan to enable schools to. function till sufficient pez~ manent buildings are available. Given the resource position, the original plan ,for school campuses can remain only a Jong:term objec tive. For the time being, priority would be given to improvement of existing structure and to the provision of the essential requirements of a residential school. The permanent consttuction programme will be revised taking into account cost effectiveness, re-phasing of thC consttuc tion sehedule. use of local material, merger of · the design of the building with the local en vironment, involvement of the local people in the construction work and feasibility of main tenance, etc. A high level Committee of Ar chitects and Engineers will go into all these aspects and submit its report by June, 1993. (iii) Admission Test (a) The validity and reliability of the admis sion tests is the most crucial factor in deter mining the success of the scheme. A high level committee will be appointed every two years to evaluate the testing process and to suggest modifications of the testing procedure if necessary. This will include consideration of the basic question whether the past approach of having a nation-wide test based on objective type answers is ap propriate or whether the test design should not be more local-specific. The first such committee will be appointed immediately; its recommendations will be incorporated in the tests for admission in the academic year 1994-95. (b) The Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti will eventually take over the conduct of tests; by mid-1994 a separate cell would be set up for doing so. (c) The Samiti should also be adequately staffed and equipped for continuous re search and evall,lation in respect of the ad . mission tests. (d) All research data thrown up by the testing procedures will be made widely available as an input in broader evaluation of the primary education system. (iv) Academic Quality : Strategies to maintain a high standard of academic achievement will be: (a) Recruitment of Teachers: The Executive Committee of the Samiti will review in March every year the recruitment vis-a-vis the manpower requirements. A job oriented test will form the basis of selec tion followed by an interview for which . about 25% marks should be set and which may include conduct of a demonstration class where feasible. Measures should be devised to auract better talented teachers to Navodaya Vidyalayas. (b) Training: An annual programme of action would be drawn up for this purpose and monitored by the Academic Advisory Committee of the Samiti. Steps would in clude continued development of in-service training programmes and teaching/learn ing materials. In addition to in-service courses, short term in-house workshops will be organized for a cluster ofNavodaya 51 • Vidyalayas and local schools. These workshops will be organi~ from 1992-93 itself. (v) Pace-setting and Networking of -Institutions: The NPE 1986 expects Navodaya Vidyalayas to become catalysts of a nation-wide programme of school improvement Navodaya Vidyalayas will be encouraged' and given.full liberty to play an active role in thi~ area in con sultation with the parents, community and local educational authorities: Each Navodaya Vidyalaya will prepare an annual action plan which will be sent to the Samiti and also report the activities undertaken by the Samiti in order to facilitate sharing of experience among Navod.aya Vidyalayas. Some possible activities which may be included in the action plan are: a) Eradication of illiteracy within a radius of one-and-a-half kilometre to begin witll; b) Mobile library scheme to disttibute books to the children and the villagers on loan for a few 48ys; c) Navodaya Vidyalayas to act as resource centres for training of teacheis of neigh bouring schools; d) Closer interaction with DIET, SCERTs, etc.; '' e) Making available resources and facilities available in Vidyalayas for. children of nearby schools; f) Short term exchange of teachers of other schools; g) Programme of training of teachers of the disttict; h) Organisation of inter-school competitions in the district. (vi) Vocational Opportunities : In oider to ensure the meanlingfulness of Navodaya Vidyalaya education to its target group, constant efforts to narrow the gap between the school and the real world of work, through vocational education and through appropriate' vocat.ional guidance, will be necessary. It will be necessary to monitor this by sample surveys of ex-students and keeping contact with alumni (for example through an alumni magazine) as far as possible. The programme of vocational education should be further expanded. In addition, keeping in view the changing scenario in work situations, computer literacy will continue to be given high \ ,, \ \ ,, \ ... .r priority. It should be the endeavour of the Samiti to widen the perspectives of its students . regarding different career oppportunities avail able to them and to seek to instil among them a des~ not merely for personal career success but for service to society and .the nation. In par ticular, entry into the teachihg profession will be encouraged and students made aware of its opportunities. Suitable students not inclined to pursue higher education, may be assisted in the matter of admission and by award of scholar ship to become primary teachers. At the same time, the Samiti may intervene to help students who have passed class XII in obtaining admis sion in colleges, and also, assist them generally in seeking admission to professional collges by means such as providing. extra reading materials, in-house coaching arrangements and provision of necessary guidance. For this pur pose, an annual action plan should be approved and monitored by the Academic Advisory Committee .. (vii) National Integration : The scheme of migration of students will continue 1to be implemented. Further, non-migrating students of class X (who constitute 70% of class-X students) should also visit the V idyalaya where the students from that Vidyalaya migrate and stay with the parents of the children of that Vidyalaya as guests during ~ summer vacation for a period 'of about one month. The experiment has been attempted in 5 Vidyalayas during 1991-92. This should be ex panded-on the basis of experience. (viii) Accountability : Accountability of the Navodaya Vidyalayas to the community it ser ves should play a decisive role. This will also entail the maximum possible decentralisation 52 and giving autonomy to the school in day-to day decisions. Structures promoting inlefaction with the community and with the parents, need to be devised. Methodologies of teacher evalua tion need to be constantly reviewed and im proved upon. This should be given higfl priQJity and immediate initial steps should be taken towards making this a continuous process. and giving autonomy to the school in day-to day decisions. Structures promoting inlefaction with the community and with the parents, need to be devised. Methodologies of teacher evalua tion need to be constantly reviewed and im proved upon. This should be given higfl priQJity and immediate initial steps should be taken towards making this a continuous process. 4. FUTUREEXPANSIONOFNAVODAYA VIDYALAYAS 9.4.1 A comprehensive review of the Scheme of Navodaya Vidyalayas will be required after Navoda,ya Vidyalayas have been established and consolidated in all districts of the country. 9.4.2 The NPE, 1986 envisages that resourees, ~the ex tent possible, will be raised by a number of measures includ ing mobilising donations./\ grant-in-aid scheme would be workt'.d out for assisting the'agencies that wish to assist the expansion of the Navodaya System by providing land, in frastructure and a share of the recurring expenditure. The ~heme ~ou.ld spell out details s~ as. the eligibility condi tion, admassaon procedures and management. "1, 9.4.3 Future Action: After the scheme has been extended to all. districts and further experience gained with it, it will be appropriate to consider .the following two measures: (a) The charging of fees from students who can af ford to pay. However, to start with, from 1993 94, Rs. 10/ per month may be charged as Pupils' Fund from each student; however, tlle Principal of the Vidyalaya may grant exemp tion to the students whose parents cannot afford to pay it. (b) Autonomy to Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti for having its own curriculum, textbooks and ex amining body.   
10. VOCATIONAL EDUCATION   
1. PRESENT SITUATION 10.U planned The programme NPE1 1986 advocated a systematic, well of vocational education which would be a distinct stream intended to prepare students for iden tified occupations. It envisaged that vocational courses would ordinarily be provided at the higher secondary (+2) stage but flexibility was provided to start vocational educa tion after class VIII. The NPE, 1986 set a target to cover 10% of higher secondary students under vocational courses. by 1990 and 25% by 1995. A substantially funded central ly spoJ!SOred scheme for Vocationalisation of Secondary Education was started with effect from February 1988. The scheme was taken for implementation in all States and Union Territories excepting Tripura, Daman and Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep. At the end of 1991-92, 12,.543 vocational sections were approved in 4400 schools, thereby creating facilities for diversion of about 6.27 lakh students at the +2 stage(@ 25 students per vocational sec tion in classes XI and XII). This accounts for 9.3% of stu dents enrolled· at the +2 stage. Although quantitatively the implementation of the Vocational Education Scheme at the +2 stage has been fairly substantial, in qualitative terms, there remains much to be done. Vocationalisation of educa tion is identified as a priority area in the Eighth Five Year Plan. 10.1.2 The NPE, 1986 had also mentioned the need for non-formal and need-based vocational programmes main· ly, though not exclusively, for disadvantaged groups. The NPE, 1986 also envisaged vocational courses at the tertiary level for facilitating vertical mobility. While some begin ning has been made in these areas, they will re.ceive impetus -during the Eighth Plan. 10.1.3 The Revised Policy Formulations retain the policy framework laid by the NPE, 1986 but for two modifications. First, the target for coverage under vocational courses has been revised  ten per cent of the higher Secondary students by 1995 a~ 25 per cent by 2000. Secondly,they envisage children at' the higher secondary level being imparted generic vocational courses which cut across several occupa tional fields and which are not occupation specific, thereby adopting an important recommendation of NPERC. 2. MANAGEMENT OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 10.2.1 Management is critical to the implementation of a complex programme of vocationalisation of education. The following management structure was envisaged under the Centrally sponsored Scheme of V ocationalisation: National Level (i) A Joint Council of Vocational Educatiqn (JCVE) under the chairmanship of Union Education Minister for the planning and coor dination of vocational programmes; to provide guidelines for development of vocational programmes at all levels, and to evolve schemes for involvement of public and private Sector in dustry in vocational education. (ii) The Bureau of Vocational Education in the Department of Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development, would provide secretariat support to the JCVE and oversee the implementation of the programmes. (iii) The NCERT through its Department of Voca tional Education would function as the apex • ~level Research and Development (R&D) in stitution giving academic support in the plan ning and implementation of vocational programmes. Regional Level (i) Boards of Apprenticeship Training would be augmented to cater to the training needs of vocational students after they complete the vocational courses at the +2 stage. (ii) The Regional Colleges of Education (RCE) under NCERTwould function' as regional voca tional teacher training institutions in addition to performing R&D functions. State Level (i) The State Council of Vocational Education (SCVE) should be set up as a counterpart of the )CVE. (ii) The Directorate of Education in the States/tiTs should provide the administrative leadership to the vocational education programmes. {iii) In the SCERTs, a separate wing would be es tablished to provide R&D support to the programme at the State level. District Level A District Vocational Education Committee would be constituted to promote the programme and maiutain linkages with the Directorate of Education and other related institutions as well   
!' 54 as backward and forward linkages with the Com 3. VOCA TIONALISATION OF SECONDARY munity. EDUCATION AT PLUS TWO LEVEL School Level A. Schematic Pattern and Coverage A senior staff member will be incharge of the 10.3.1 As already mentioned, the Scheme of management and actual implementation of the Vocationalisation of Secondary Education at +21evel was vocational courses. He will also build up contacts started in 1987-88 and taken up for implementation in 24 and linkages with the community. States and 4 UTs. Facilities have thus been created for diver 10.2.2 As envisaged by the scheme, the JCVE and its Standing Committee were established at the national level. In and view the number of the magniblde of areas requiring and complexity close attention of the programme it has been decided to set up a Centrallnstiblte of Vocational Educa tion (CIVE) under the umbrella of the NCERT, but with · considerable functional autonomy. The Instiblte will be the apex R&D institution in the field of vocational education. 10.2.3 HQwever, at the State level, out of the 24 States and . 4 UTs, only.15 States and 2 UTs have set up offices at the Directorate level; Only 8 States and one UT have set up or ganisations at the SCERT level and only 6 States have set up district level organisations for this programme. Many of these States, which have set up offices, have not filled the full contingent of posts required. Only 11 States have estab lished the SCVBs or a similar body as the counterpart of the JCVE at the State level. 10.2.4 The following steps need to be taken: (i) The state govemmentsiUTs should set up ade sion of about 6.27 lakh student.~; at +21evel @25 sbldents per vocational section at +2level. The NCERT undertook a quick appraisal of the implementation of the programme in seven States in 1990. The Department of ·Education had engaged M/s Oper Main Systems to collect data on im plementation of the programme. Data upto 1991 has been received for 19 States and UTs. A computerised Manage ment Information System (MIS) has been developed so that necessary information on different aspects of the .programme implementation are available at different levels from the district to the Central Government. The MIS will become operational from July 1992-93. 10.3.2 A determined effort will be made to introduce the programme in Tripura, Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep. The main emphasis during the 8th .Plan would be consolidation and quaJ;.ty improvement of the existing programme. By the end of the 8th .t>lan it is proposed to create facilities for diversion of an additional coverage 2.62 lath to students 8.89 lath at students +2 level. or in tlking percentage the cumulative terms, ap quate management structures at all levels as en proximately 11% of~ student population at +2 stage. visaged under the centrally sponsored scheme. (ii) Personnel manning the management structure should be well trained and encouraged to estab lish linkages with concerned agencies in the Government, voluntary organizations and in dividuals with specialized training. They should also remain in position for a tenure of at least three years so as to give continuity to the programme. B. Revision or the Scheme 10.33 In the light of the feedback received from the States and the experience gained in implerr. entation, certain aspects in the scheme are being revised. These include the financial outlays for equipment, construction of worksheds, vocational surveys, raw materials and field visits. Assis tance to vocational organisations would be separate scheme hereafter. (iii) While giving financial assistance preference C. Essentials for a Successful Vocational Programme will be given to States/UTs which have set up adequate management stJUCture. (iv) The JCVE and SCVE should meet regularly in order to provide the required guidance and co oridnation at the National and State levels respectively. (v) The CIVE should be made functionally effec tive as early as possible. 10.3.4 Essentials for a successful vocational Programme:  The credibility of the programme should bees tablished. This would depend on its quality, relevance and acceptability.  Education-Employment linkages should be fumly established.  Adequate infrastructure -.physical and academic -should be provided.  Assured supply. of funds over an extended period of 5 to 10 years.  Training programme for teachers  both pre service and in-service. • • ... ··'!Or " '  Training of teacher ttainers.  Effective management structures at all levels  at the Centre and in the States/UTs and reasonable tenure for their functionaries.  Equivalence among the vocational, technical and academic courses.  Curriculum development in consultation with employers.  Enlisting community involvement and par ticipation of commerical establishments and in " dustrial houses.  Need for active co-opemtion of other govern ment Departments with the Department of Education at the Central and State level. D. Apprenticeship Training 10.3.5 It has been consistently felt that students of the Vocational courses at+ 2level should be provided facilities for apprenticeship training under the Apprentices Act as an important catalyst for promoting vocational education. The tmining would strengthen the skills of the vocational stu dents by placing them in real work situation in in dustries/farms whereby establishing their worthiness in the area of vocational tmining obtained.'In 1986, the Appren tices Act administered by the Ministry of Labour (DGE&l) was amended to provide tmining to vocational students of +2level (Technician Vocational Apprentices). This scheme is being implemented through the four Regional Boards of Apprenticeship Tmining (BOA'I) at Bombay, Calcutta, Madms and Kanpur. Twenty subject fields were notified for apprenticeship training in 1988. Despite that, the actual number of students who could actually get the benefit of these facilities is very small. The Central Apprenticeship Council under the Ministry of Labour has approved the in clusion of 40 more subject fields under the Apprentices Act (Technician Vocational Apprentices). This would facilitate a much larger number of students to derive the benefit of Apprenticeship Training. Efforts would be made to cover more vocational courses under the Apprentices Act To derive maximum benefit from tmining facilities under the Apprenticeship Scheme under the category of Technician Vocational Apprentices, the States/UTs should, as far as possible, adopt the nomenclature of the vocational courses approved under the Apprentices Act (Technician Vocation al Apprentices). They should also liaise with the Regional Boards for training of the students. 10.3.6 The Regional Boards of Apprenticeship Training should be suitably strengthened and ~tivated so that they may effectively fulrlll their resposibility in the placement of +2 Vocational students for Apprenticeship Tmining. Efforts should be made by the Boards to cover a much larger num ber of students passing out of+ 1 vocational stream in the 60 9-881 M/o. HRDN) ' 55 courses presently covered under the Apprentices Act (Tech nician Vocational Apprentices). E. Teacher Training 10.3.7 It is the teacher who interprets and imple~nts the educational policy in actual class room situation and as such is the most crucial input Presently, pre-service tmining for vocational teachers is practically non-existent; in-service training is not adequate and competent vocational teachers are oftennotavailule in desired numbers. Teacher tmining, therefore, requires priority attention. 10.3.8 A phased and well structured progmmme of pre service teacher tmining will be dmwn by CIVE and imple mented in RCEs on a priority basis. The pre-service tmining would gradually be extended to other suitable institutions such as agricultuml and geneml universities. By the end of the 8th Plan, 1600 teachers are expected to be given pre-ser vice training. 10.3.9 Inservice courses will be organised by the States in selected professional institutions on the basis of guidelines already provided by NCERT/CIVE in terms of dumtion, content and methodology. The SCERT should be the nodal agency at the state level for coordinating the teacher tmin ing programme. SCERTs should develop linkages with DIETs and Colleges of Teacher Education for this purpose. Besides, the CIVE will also conduct inservice training progmmmes on national or regional level in selected areas in its own premises as weD as in collaboration with other ex pert institutions such as Universities, Research Labomtories, Medical Institutions, etc. It is estimated that by the end of the 8th Plan, 12000 teachers will receive in service tmining. 10.3.10 The State Departments concerned with vocational education will also evolve schemes to utilise resources in institutions, such as those under Khadi and Village In dustries ·Commission (KVIC), Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK), Farms, Hospitals, etc., for tmining vocational teachers, on part-time as well as on full-time basis. It is es timated that 100 such professional institutions would provide traning to about 5000 teachers. The CIVE will monitor and evaluate the pre-service and inservice tmining courses. F. Curriculum 10.3.11 The national vocational education curriculum for the+2 stage has been adopted by most States and UTs which have launched the vocational progmmme so far. A few are yet to fully switch over from the original state pattern to the national design. 10.3.12 The nationally recommended curriculum design consists of the following components: 1. Language(s) 15·20%   
10-15% 2. General Foundation Course (Includ ing Environment Education. Rural Development and Entrepreneurship Development) 3. Vocational Theory and Practice (in 65-70% cluding on-the-job training) 10.3.13 It is essential that knowledge and skills acquired have relevance to self and wage employment, and should be based on an assessment of the market opportunities and potentialities. The communication skills. entrepreneurial skills. perception of environment and sustainable develop ment shouldfind suitable weightage. On th~ job training as an integral component of vocational curriculum is necessary for developing skill competencies. 10.3.14 The following I steps would be taken: i) Persuading the States which have not yet adopted the national curriculum design to adopt the design at the earliest. ii) Developing competency based curricula fol lowing vocational the national courses. pattern · in respect of all new ·; i) Ensuring substantial time allocation for im-the job ttaining and its proper execution. iv) Developing capabilities for teaching the General Fou,;dation Course with particular reference to entrepreneurship development. curricular materials. teacher training. follow up support. etc. 10.3.15 The States will primarily be responsible for the fU'St three steps; the collaborative support of the CIVE would be available to them. The CIVE will have to play a more direct role in regard to the fourth step by bringing in the expertise of other institutions in the field of entrepreneurship develop menL G. Vocational Education at Tertiary Level 10.3.16 One of the factors responsible for the slow progress of vocationalisation of secondary education is the lack of opportunities for the vocational stream graduates for their professional growth and career advancement. 10.3.17 Vertical mobility can be provided for the +2 stage vocational students through specially designed diploma courses, general degree courses and professional degree courses. 10.3.18 In spite. of the recommendations to this effect made in the POA. 1986. not much progress has been made in this regard. Some states have allowed the vocational stream graduates to enter second year of polytechnics while some others have reserved seats for them in the first year. Most of the universities have permitted vocational students to enroll 56 in Arts and Commerce disciplines without any bridge course. But such a ready entry has not been possible in Science and professional courses. No bridge courses have been designed 10 facilitate such a mobility and no new cour ses introduced at the tertiary stage which could help voca tional students to pursue higher studies in these areas. This deficiency would be rectified in the 8th Plan. 10.3.19 The Committee set up by the UGC to prepare model curricula for vocational subjects at the undergraduate level for students from the +2 vocational stream should complete its work at the earliest so that the courses recommended by them could be introduced by universities in the academic session 1993-94. The introduction of vocational courses ought to be preceded by a realistic assessment of the require ment of qualified teachers, laboratory/workshop. etc.,toen sure that students who offer these courses graduate with the knowledge and skills required by the market This would not only provide vertical mobility to vocational students but also offer an opportunity for greater diversity in course of ferings in the university system in general. Further. UGC and CIVE would take a lead in organising these courses and monitoring their implementation. H. Measures Facilitating Employment (a) Equivalence of Certificates 10.3.20 Since employment is the maip objective of vocationalization, it is important that standards are clearly laid down for the competencies required and that there should be an understanding regarding equivalence of cer tificates issued by various State Governments. organiza tions, within the Government by different Deparunents, etc. Much progress needs to ~made in this area. lt is proposed to entrust this vital task to the CIVE which would develop a suitable mechanism for the purpose of accreditation and recognition of vocational courses. (b) Modification ofRecruitmenJ Rules 10.3.21 The acceptability of vocational courses would depend on the employability of vocational students. This in tum will depend on the usable skills acquired by the students as well as on the recruitment rules. The recruitment rules need to be amended for giving preference to students ttained in specific vocational skills in jobs requiring such skills. For this purpose the Deparunent of Education has been pursu ing with v&rious Departments at the Central level and at the State level for amending the recruitment rules. At the in stance of the Department of Education. the Department of Personnel and Training issued a circular in November, 1988 to all Ministeries/ Deparunents requesting them to review their recruitment rules in order to make the vocational pas soots eligible for employmenL The State Governments/tiT Administrations were advised to take urgent action in this regard in respect of State Departments/Oiganisations. The response liM. however. not been very encouraging although some states have done considerable work in this area. At the national Jevel. a Committee with a ~ntative each from the Department of Education. the Department of Penonne1 and Tiaining. and Ministry of Labour has been set up by~ Cabinet Secretatiit to reView the position department-WISe about the posts available. where preference may be given for persons. who have completed the +2 vocational courses training. After identifiC81ion of the posts. recruitment rules for such posts would be modified suitably indicating the preference to be given. Similar initiatives ~ be ~ by the State Governments with the Commtttee reporting directly to the Chief Secretary .. It should be the endeavour at both Central and State levels to complete identifiCation of posts in one year. Actual modifiCations of Rules should be completed as early as possible and in any case before the end of the 8th plan. (c) Vocational Guidance 10.3.22 The centrally sponsored scheme envisages that vocational guidance will be available in the . school for providing necessary guidance to ~dents. parents. and teachers regarding suitable educabonal and vocauonal ::hoices. The guidance programmes should be directed at in Conning the students about job opportunities in various courses. facilities ffl!' on the job training and placement by ~ in collabcntion with employers. However. very few States. and UTs are actually providing any systematic guidance to students. It is imperative that this aspect C'f t.T. vocational programme is given due importance ar:f' the teacher provided for general foundation courses should be responsible for providing vocational guidance. He should also be adequately uained to carry oot his functions. A trained counsellor could be appointed at the state cost at the district level to organise the career advice centre and assist the teachers in vocational guidance activities. Existing State Bureaus of educational and vocational guidance should un ~ the responsibility of train~g teachers. in consult ation with the NCERT for thetr respecttv~ States. States/UTs should also popularise the vocational programme by providing informatiOn on the media. The NCERT has made some video films and popuJarization folders which could be suitably used. (d) Unkaguwith GovenurrentDeptJI'tmentsandlndiUlrial Houses 10.3.23 Successful implementation of the programme of vocationalisation of education would be facilitated by the implementing agencies at the Centre and State by develop ing linkages with Government Departments. industry and institutions in the fields of agriculture. medicine and health. ~. If SCVE mee&a regularly then only will it be possible 57 for the linkages to be forged. The State Governments~ set for themselves targets for forging linkages so that there is an element of urgency. There should be frequent interac tion between the SCVE and the agencies with which linkages would be set up. Association of senior functionaries like the Chief Secrewy would help. 10.3.24 Unkages are riow available in the agricultural and health sectors. The Indian Council of Agricultural R<*'Mch (ICAR) in collaboration with the Department of Vocation al Education of the NCERT has already developed some need-based and employment-oriented courses. The courses need to be further revised and updated with the help ofiCAR Institutes/ State Agricultural Universities. The Agricultural Universities. their regional resealch saations and sub-sta tions and other infrastructures may also participate in the preparation or the curriculum and serve as faculty in the nearby voCational training programmes. Similarly. the other infrastructure developed in various ICAR Institutes. KVKs and other organizations assisted by ICAR. NGOs and GOs can also be drafted in accelerating the programme of agricultural vocationalization. 10.3.25 The Mi~istry of Health and Family Welfare in col laboration with Department or Education have dcvelop,ed health related courses at +2 level for training various categories or para-medical ~as envisaged in NPE •. 1986 (Para 5.18). Para-medical staff are the back. bone of hospi tals and the public health system. and thele is a need to match the future requirements in conjunction with the voca tional education programmes. Considering the acute shortage of para-med.\cal staff. States/UTs should make ef forts to introduce more health related ~ in close col laboration with the Ministry of Health. hospitals and other concerned agencies. (e) Self Emplo~nt 10.3.26 As the organized sector can provide employment to only a small percentage or the total work force. most of the students passing out of the +2 vocational stream have to be prepared for self employmcnL The question of providing loan facilities on easy terms to students of vocational cour ses to enable them to take up small scale business was taken up by the Department of Education with the Banking Division of the Ministry efFinance; Development Commis sioner (Small Scale Industries) Ministry of Industry and the Ministry of Rural DevelopmenL Under the scheme of Self Employment for Edu~ted Unemployed Youth (SEEUY). students of +2 vocational courses will be given preference for loans povided they fulfil other criteria of eligibility. Banking Division of the Ministry of Finance have issued in structions to the banks to finance small scale industries on h'beralized margins and concessional rates of interest. This would facilitate students or +2 vocational courses to get bank assistance for settin-g up small scale industries. 1'he State Education Departments should bring it to the notice of all concerned and have meetings with State Industries Departments for linkages to facilhiate self employment. 10.3.27 The Directors of Vocational Education in the StateS/UTs should contact District Industries Centres for loan facilities under SEEUY. They should also have linkages with the Project DirectorofDistrictRural Develop ment Agency (DRDA) for assistance under Training for Rural Youth in Self Employment (TRYSEM) programmes under which loan facilities are arranged through banks for persons from families below poverty line, to enable them to set themselves up in self-employment. I. Research 10.3.28 The NCERT through the CIVE would function as the apex level R&D institution. At the State Level, the SCERTs are required to provide R&D support to the programme. It is necessary that research activities should be an important activity of these organisations at the national and the State levels. 4. OTHER VOCATIONAL EDUCATION PROGRAMMES (i) Work Experience 10.4.1 At the primary and middle school stages of educa tion Socially Useful Productive Work (SUPW)/Work Ex perience (WE) forms an integral part of the cur:flculum in many States, but the actual implementation, both in coverage and quality, leaves much to be desired. It has been observed in actual practice that WE has degenerated into trivial activities in the school and in many states the time al location rarely exceeds 10%. ! 0.4.2 The State Govemments/UTs should ensure that WE is actually included as an integral part of the curriculum, that teachers are trained to impart the instruction and that neces sary financial provision is made. WE P• ogrammes are aimed at developing confidence and sufficient psycho-motor skills in students to facilitate their entry into the world of work at a subsequent stage. In schools where WE already forms a part of the curriculum these courses need to be toned up in keeping wilh the perceptions reflected in the NPE. Atleast 12.5 %to 20% of the school time should be allocated for a systematic implementation of the programme. (ii) Pre-vocational F..ducation 10.4.3 The NPE 1986 has envisaged that pre-vocational programmes would be provide-d at the lower secondary stage to facilitate the choice of vocational courses at the higher secondary stage. A few states have taken the initia tive in implementing this provision. During the 8th Plan WE at the lower secondary stage would assume the form of pre vocational education. 58 10.4.4 The objectives of pre-vocational education at the lower secondary stage would be to impart training in simple marketable skills to students in classes IX and X, to develop vocational interests and to allow for self-exploration of vocational preferences, to prepare students for participation in work and to inculcate the desired values related to work culture. 10.4.5 Pre-vocational education would be offered in a phased manner in all secondary schools, to students in clas ses IX and X. The courses would be in modular form and each school would offer at least 3-4 courses relevant to the local needs. Twenty per cent of the School time would be made available for pre-vocational education. Additional time would be provided out of school hours for intensive practice/learning activities. The first year of the 8th Plan would be a preparatory year for orientation of Head Masters and Teacher Co-ordinators, teacher training, development of instructional materials and creation of infrastructure in the schools. From 1993-94 onwards, the programme will be gradually implemented. (iii) Generic Vocational Courses 10.4.6 The streaming of students into vocational courses aims at developing employment-specific skills in in dividuals. In addition to the present model of 'streaming', the Revised Policy Formulations provide for Generic Voca tional Courses (GVC) for the students of the academic stream. The GVC would aim tO develop those employment related skills which cut across various vocations and are needed by all members of the educated work force regard less of the person's occupation. Computer applications, typing, interpersonal skills, problem solving along with the acquaintance of the state-of-art technologies such as in the field of information, communication, production, distribu tion, etc. can be broadly included in the curricblum of such a course. The GVC would be a step towards improving the quality of general education for the future technology oriented society. 10.4.7 In view of the fact that GVC curriculum would have to be developed from scratch keeping in view the country's needs and existing realities the programme will be experi mented in 400 higher secondary institutions in different regions of the country. The CIVE will be responsible for this try-out and it's wider implementation during the 9th Plan. 10.4.8 It is envisaged that the flfst two years of the Plan would be devoted to developing curriculum and support in structional material, training teachers and equipping schools. The next two years would concentrate on actual try out in the schools while in the final year: the programme evaluation would be conducted. (iv) Vocational Education Programmes for Special Groups and out or School Population 10.4.9 The tribal and ~ population do not have ade quate· ~ to school education, vocational courses in schools or vocational\technical training schoolS/institu tions. There is also a paucity of vocational courseS/institu tions to cater to the women population whose earning power could be considerably augmented through vocational train ing. Handicapped and disabled persons fonn another sig nificant section of the society who have. at preseat practically no avenues to acquire suitable productive skills to make their living more meaninsful and self reliant. In ad dition, there is a large student population which does not go beyond class vm and who need to be provided some skill training. 10.4.10 Vocational training programmes ofnon-fonnal na ture are·being organised by various Departments/organisa tions like th.e Department of Rural Development, 'DepartmentofWomen and Child Development, Ministry of Welfare, !CAR, KVIC, Central Social Welfare Board, Community Polytechnics, Shramik Vidyapeeths, Jan Shit shan Nilayams, etc. While these organisations would con tinue With their effort to provide non-formal vocational training programmes through volu."ltary organisations for different target groups; the Department of Education under the Vocational Education Programme would concenttateon Olpllising non-formal vocational education and training programmes for school dropouts in the age group 14-18 years who had completed class VIII but had not gone beyond class X. . . 10.4.11 It is also felt dUll all polytechnics, engineering col leges and other \'OCational and technical training institutions should organise short-duration non-fonnal vocational ttain ing programmes. The concerned Ministry/Department/or ganisation as well as the States/UTs should ·earmark funds and provide financial assisaance to these institutions for this ~· 10.4.12 The Ministries of Welfare and Labour are already organising $0me vocational training programmes for the handicapped. They would intensify their efforts. The Department of Education would also encowage voluntary organisations working in this area. The CIVE will also provide support to vecational ttaining programmes for the handicapped through teacher training materials and other resoqrces. (v) Vocational Education Programmes for Girls 10.4.13 The involvement of girls in the vocational educa tion programmes is crucial. Under the Centrually Sponsored Programme at+ 21evel, girls have equal access to vocation al courses as the boys. Efforts should be made by the 5WWUTs to con:K;iously encourage dle pani<;ipation of 59 girls in the non-ttaditional and emergent technologies. The non-fonnal vocational programmes with emphasis on entrepreneurship should be specially geared to the needs of the out-of-school girls. Facilities for guidance 'Should be available for encouraging their participation. (vi) Vocational Education for Special Areas 10.4.14 Separate vocational schools are proposed to be set up in the rural areas and in the North Eastern States where it is not viable to start vocational courses in general educa tional institutions. As and when these vocational schools are established they would also run short duration non-fonnal vocational training programmes for special groups and out of school population. (vii)Assistance to Voluntary Organisat~ons for Ex perimental/Innovative Programmes and Short Term Vocational Courses 10.4.15 The centtally sponsored scheme of Vocationalisa tion of secondary education envisages the role of voluntary agencies for conducting innovative programmes in the field of vocational education and provides financial assisaance to selected agencies for this purpose. However, since the scheme was launched in 1987-88 only a few voluntary or ganisations could. avail the assisaance provided under the scheme. This was niainlybecausethe scope was limited and assisaance restricted to programmes of "innovative charac ter". It was therefore felt that, to mobilise greater involve ment of . th~ voluntary organisations in the vocational education programme, the scope and objectives of the scheme should be widened and the details of the facilities offered to voluntary organisations be made available separately. Accordillgly a Scheme of Assistance to Volun tary Organisations is now being fonnulated. 10.4.16 The overall aim of the scheme is to promote non formal vocational education through NGOs for achieving the goals spell out in the NPE. The specifiC objectives of the scheme are to provide financial assistance to the voluntary organisations for:  Innovative/experimental projects.  short-term training programmes of vocational education preferably in backward/rural areas and particularly for girls of the age group of 14-18 years who have dropped out of the school before completing Class X.  Organising· speeial vocational training centres in rural areas where no institution/organisation is available to start non fonnal courses.  training of vocational teacherslresou.--ce persons.  other activities connected with the vocational education. 10.4.17 States/UTs would have the primary responsibility to enlist the voluntary organisations for implementing the scheme. The NCERT should prepare the syllabus, curricula and instructional material for more short-term courses of varying d~tion. The programmes undertaken by voluntary agencies under this scheme should be evaluated towards the end of 8th Plan. (viii}Vocational Education through Open Learning • 10.4.181be NOS has taken up a crash programme of vocationalisation. Various types of vocational courses under different groups would be introduced and offered to the smdents with effect from the academic year 1992-93. The courses would be offered in collaboration with support ing partners, organisations and institutions working in the vocational education field and having basic infrastrucmral facilities. Presently NOS is linked with Shramik Vidyapeeths who are planning to offer a number of voca tionaJ programmes from the academic session 1993-94. Possibilities have been explored to run Vocational Courses in partnership basis with many national level Organisations such as KVKs, VoluntarY Health Association of India, Central Social Welfare Board, Council for Advancement of Peoples Action and Rural Technology (CAP ART), KVIC, etc. 5. MONITORING AND EVALUATION 10.5.1 A systematic and regular monitoring of the voca tional education programme is essential for its effective im plementation. Under the centrally sponsored scheme of 60 Vocationalisation of Secondary Education, quarterly progress reports were to be sent by the State/UTs. However, these were generally not forthcoming and, therefore, there was considerable information gap between the policy plan ners and what was happening at the grass roots level. A com puterised MIS has now been developed under which information would flow regularly from the schools to the district level, from the district level to the Directorate/State level and from the Directorate/State level to MHRD. The information is required on a quarterly and annual basis in a prescribed proforma. The first level training of coordinators has been organised by NCERT in 1991. The States should ensure that the MIS is systematically implemented and in formation is regularly sent to MHRD. The flJ'St quarterly report is expected from the states in July 1992. 10.5.2 The NCERT would be responsible for conducting evaluation studies on different aspects of programme im plementation. Similar studies would also be entrusted to out side agencies. States/UTs should also conduct evaluation of their programme. They should obtain systematic follow up iDformation on the students who have passed out of the vocational courses to find out whether they have found employment and if so whether it is in the area of skill ob tained. 10.5.3 A monitoring system would aiso be developed for the other components of the vocational education prograntme, namely, implementation of generic vocational courses at higher secondary level and pre-vocational educa tion at the. secondary level.   
11. HIGHER EDUCATION .. 1. THE PRESENT SITUATION 11.1.1 We have one of the largest systems of higher educa tion in the world. However, the spread and developments in this area have been uneven. The infrastructural facilities of universities and colleges vary widely which accounts for variation in quality of teaching and research. The courses offered by the universities are genemlly of a traditional na ture and few are related to the job market and environment. The credibility of the evaluation system is being eroded. Though university research is genecally acknowledged to be cost-effective, it does not get an adequate proportion of the funds available to the research sector. 11.1.2 The university system should move to the centre stage. It should utilise its autonomy for innovations in teach ing and pursuing high quality research. The emphasis on autonomy of colleges and departments, provision of means to interact across boundaries of institutions and funding agencies, better infrastructure, more rationalised funding of research, integration of teaching, research and evaluation, all these mjrror this major concern. 2. THE POUCY, PROGRAMME AND STRATEGIES OF IMPLEMENTATION ' 11.2.1 The NPE; 1986 visualises that higher education should become dynamic as never before .. The main! featw-es of the programmes and strategies to impart the necessary dynamism to the higher education system consist of the fol lowing: (i) Consolidation and Expansion of Institutions (ii) Development of Autonomous Colleges and Departnlents (iii) Redesigning of Courses (iv) Training of Teachers (v) Strengthening Research (vi) Improvements in Efficiency (vii) Creation of sttuctures for co-ordination at the State and National levels. (viii) Mobility (ix) Finances (x) Review and Monitoring 3. MAJOR DEVELOPMENTS 11.3.1 The major developments in the field of higher education in pursuance of the National Policy for Education (NPE), 1986 and its Programme of Action (POA), 191J6 in clude: i) · Revision of pay-scales of university and college teachers with financial assistance from the Central Government; provi~on for career ad vancement training; and linked formulation to perfonnance of a Code appraisal of Profes and sional Ethics for teachers; ii) Introduction of National Eligibility Test (NE'I) for recruiunent of university and college lec turers and selection of Junior Research Fellows; iii) Establishment of 48 Academic Staff Colleges by UGC in different universities in the Seventh Five Year Plan for organising orientation programmes for newly appointed teachers; identification forconductingrefresherprogmmmes of 200 University Departments far in-ser vice teachers; so far 4600 teachers have par ticipated in orientation programmes and 8400 have attended in-service training; iv) Conferment of autonomous status on 86 col leges in 7 States; v) Preparation and examination of a comprehen sive report by the Gnanam Committee ap~ pointed by UGC ·to review the management structure·of universities; vi) Setting up of Inter-University Centres for providing common facilities for research in Nuclear Science. Astronomy and Astro Physics, Atomic Energy, and Crystal Growth; vii) Circulation of model curricula developed by UGC's Curriculum Development Centres in 27 subjects in Science, Social Sciences and Humanities; viii) Formulation of UGC guidelines on setting up of State Councils of Higher Education (SCHE), and establishment of a SCHE in Andhra Pradesh; and ix) ~pansion of the distance learning and open university systems. 11.3.2 Proposals for establishing an Accreditation and As sessment Council are in an advanced stage. However, the propos81 for setting up a National Apex Body for Higher Education has not made much headway. 11.3.3 1986 -.vas The constrained implementation by lack of of consensus the NPE, 1986 on some and impor POA, . tant measures such as higher learning; development non-proliferation of of autonomous institutions colleges; C5 of · ,... , · tablishment of SCHEs; redesigning of courses; promotion of student and teacher mobility; Resource insufficiencies and absence of effective monitoring and review mechanisms were also constraints. 4. CONSOLIDATION AND EXPANSION 11.4.1 Despite the statement in the NPE, 1986 that the main emphasis will be on consolidation of, and expansion of facilities in, the existing institutions, the unplanned proliferation of institutions of higher learning continues un abated. Thus the number of universities has gone up from 149 in 1985-86 to 176 in 1990-91, the number of colleges from 5816 to 7121 and enrolment of students from about 36 lakh to over 44 lakh during the same ~riod. . ~ 11.4.2 The NPE, 1986 states that provision will be made for minimum facilities, admjsswns will be regulated accord ing to capacity and urgent steps will be taken to protect the system froni degradation. However, in most parts of the country existing institutions of higher education are still constrained to·admit students beyond their capacity without commensurate provision of physical and academic facilities. There is no institutional or other mechanism to en sure that admissions to universities and colleges are restricted to capacity. 11.4.3 State Governments have been unable to provide adequate funds to universities and colleges for provision of necessary infrastructure. At present as many as 55 State universities and 3000 colleges in different States are not eligible to receive assistance from UGC mainly due to lack of minimum facilities. 11.4.4 As the number of State universities and colleges eligib~ for grants from UGC gradually increases and the resources available to UGC remain limited, UGC's assis tance to the State sector is being thinly spread. During the Seventh Five Year Plan, UGC'sassistance to a State univer sity averaged Rs.2.5 crore only and to a college it averaged Rs:4.5 Iakh only 11.4.5 An analysis of the growth of colleges during the period 1986-87 to 1990-91 reveals that the 4 States of Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, and Kar nataka accounted for nearly 60% of the increase in the total number of colleges during the period 8nd that 65% of the increase was in Arts/Science/Commerce colleges. Increase in the number of colleges in some of the other States was negligible. This underlines the skewed pattern of growth in the·oottegiate system and the urgent necessity for planned and coordinated develOpment of higher education in States. 11.4.6 In the light of the experience of the implementation of. NPE, "1986 and POA, 1986 the following action is proposed: (i) The establishment of State Councils of Higher Education (SCHE) as statutory bodies in all States during the Eighth Five Year Plan to en 62 sure proper planning and coordination of the development of highereducation. In view of the fact that it may not be possible for small States, particularly in the North Eastern region, to es tablish separate Councils of Higher Education, such States will be encouraged to set up Joint Councils of Higher Education. For the North Eastern region, this responsibility could either be entrusted to the North Eastern Council (NEC) or a Council of Higher Education for all the States. (ii) Pending the establishment of State Councils of Higher Education, every State Government should, in partnership with UGC, underUIJce a survey of the existing facilities for higher education in the State and its projected needs upto the year A.D. 2000. The information col lected in the survey, should be used to develop, by 1993-94, a computerised Management In formation System (MIS) to identify areas of theState which are not properly served by existing universities/oolleges, and institutions which are over-crowded and/or deficient in minimum facilities. (iii) To minimise expenditure on establishment of ~ new colleges and universities it Should be en sured that their campuses are compact and that they are established at places where infrastruc tural facilities like power, communication, road, transport, water, etc. are easily available. (iv) The optimum utilisation of the existing in frastructure in universities an· f colleges should be ensured by introduction of extra shifts, espe cially in metropolitan areas and large cities. (v) When the need for a College is established, its affiliation to a university is an academic matter and should be given on academic grounds alone, without any other considerations. The final authority for granting affiliation, its con· tinuation, extension or dis-affiliation should vest solely with the appropriate university authorities. However, since affiliation may create eligibility for grant-in-aid , the university should consult the State Government concerned before granting affiliation to a private college. States should review the relevant legal provisions to give effect to these recommenda tions and universities should exercise greater vigour in adhering to UGC guidelines while ex ercising their powers of affiliation. (vi) Where the existing colleges fall short of satis fying the conditions of affiliation prescribed by UGC their :requirements should be carefully as sessed and brought to the notice of the colleges and the State Government concerned so that they are provided threshold facilities, preferab ly during the Eighth Five Year Plan. The estab lishment of new colleges in States, which have a large number of colleges with sub-standard facilities, should be deferred until such time as the existing colleges can be provided with min imum facilities. Efforts should also be made to evolve a consensus among UGC, State Govern ments and Universities not to continue provisional affiliation of colleges beyond the initial period of five years. (vii) There is an urgent need to review, revise and update grant-in-aid rules in the light of recent developments in the f~eld of higher education. It is felt that the criteria of •deficit' as the basis for providing grant-in-aid to colleges should be reviewed and issues such as per capita cost, teacher student ratio, types of courses offered, internal resource generation, performance ap praisal of teachers, etc. betakenintoaccountfor determining the quantum of grant-in-aid pay able to colleges. For this purpose, UGC should formulate model guidelines in this regard. (viii) The recommendations made by the Gnanam Committee in regard to changes in the manage ment structure of the universities should be im plemented by all States as and when approved byCABE. (ix) The movement towards entrance tests for ad mission to institutions of higher education will be encouraged and promoted by UGC and State Governments. The services of· the National Evaluationn Organisation (NEO) should be utilised by the university system for develop ing, designing and administering entrance tests for admission. During the next three years· (i.e., by 1995) all universities should devise Entrance Tests for admission to post-graduate courses and prescribe ceilings for admission to postgraduate and professional courses, keeping in view the availability of teachers, libraries, laboratories, etc. It should be ensured that entrance tests for admission do not militate against students belonging to the weaker sec tions of society and rural areas who may not be proficient in the use of the English language and lack communication skills. (x) With escaJation in the cost of equipment, books and journals, a system of sharing and pooling of 10-881 M/o. HRD/95 63 resources within university departments and between neighbouring universities/colleges, particularly in metropolitan areas and large cities, should be worked out within the next year (1993-94) by the UGC in consultation with the State Governments. To ensure better utilisation of equipment costing Rs. 2 lakh or more, their use should be monitored by introducing a sys tem of ·utility Audit' based on log book entries indicating the number of hours per day such equipment is put to use by faculty and students. (xi) Inter University Centres were set up for provid ing common facilities to researchers from all parts of the country. Scholars in univer sities/colleges should be provided with oppor tunities for taking full advantage of the expensive and modern facilities in these Centres. (xii) Given the necessity to arrest the declining trend in the flow of plan funds from UGC to state universities and colleges, the severe constraint of resources and the need to provide adequate infrastructure in newer central universities and the three central universities proposed to be es tablished in the North-East, the Government should exercise restraint in setting up more central universities. 5. DEVELOPMENT OF AUTONOMOUS COLLEGES AND DEPARTMENTS (a) Autonomous Colleges 11.5.1 In pursuance of the NPE, 1986 and POA, 1986 UGC revised the Scheme of Autonomous Colleges to provide for criteria for selection of colleges, procedure for grant of autonomy, pattern of governan& of autonomous colleges, and mechanism for monitoring and evaluation of the Scheme. The UGC guidelines provide for financial as sistance of Rs.4-6 lakh per annum to under-graduate col leges and Rs.7.00 lakh per annum to colleges offering under-graduate and post-graduate courses. In accordance with these guidelines 80 colleges in seven States have been granted autonomy since 1986. UGC has established a Cell to monitor the progress of the scheme on a continuing basis. 11.5.2 The POA 1986 had envisaged the establishment of 500 autonomous colleges in the 7th Plan. Though the num ber of colleges granted autonomy since 1986 falls short of the target mentioned in the POA, it is more than four times the number during the preceding twenty years. Of the 106 autonomous colleges in the country, the three states ofTamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh account for 90 colleges. The need for pursuing the implementation of the scheme in the remaining Slates wilh greater vigour is evi 64 dent It would appear that the initial enthusiasm for this scheme has waned due to the opposilion of a few States to the scheme on the ground that it is elitist, apprehensions ex· pressed by the teaching community regarding increase in their work-load, arbitrariness by Managements, ir regularities in conduct of internal examinations, paucity of funds, and operational difficulties in implementing the scheme. 11.5.3 In 1991, UGC had appointed an Expert Committee to review the implementation of the scheme of autonomous colleges. The major recommendations of the Committee were:  The scheme should be continued during the 8th Plan period in view of its objectives.  An appropriate mechanism should be established at the State level for effective monitoring of the Scheme.  Immediate action should be taken for amendment of the Acts/Statutes of the universities to make an enabling provision for conferment of autonomous status on colleges.  State Governments should not transfer the teachers from Government autonomous colleges; should also son out the problems of increased work-load of teachers for these colleges, besides fulfilling the system of block grants for main tenance purposes.  The State Governments and the universities should hold regular meetings" with Principals of autonomous colleges for coordination and resolving of issues.  The Universities should accept the decisions of the autonomous colleges regarding new courses and flexibility in cOmbination of courses.  The autonomous colleges should prepare perspective plans for development, activate Finance Committees as well as Planning and Evaluation Committiees. The Commission accepted the report of the Commit tee in its meeting held on 6th June, 1991. 11.5.4 The following action is proposed for implementa tion of the scheme of autonomous colleges during the 8th Plan: (a) the recommendations of the UGC Expert Com mittee on Autonomous Colleges should be im plemented at the earliest; (b) the nunibtr of autonomous colleges should be increased substantially; (c) a Council of Autonomous Colleges be estab · lished in every State in 1991-92 to review the progress of the scheme and to resolve the opera tional diffiCulties in its implementation; and (d) UGC should establish a seperatemechanism fot evaluation of the performance of autonomous colleges. (b) Autonomous Departments 11.5.5 UGC's scheme for grant of autonomous status to Departments in Universities has not inade much headway. The experience of the few Departments which have been granted autonomy has not been systematically analysed. The following action should, therefore, be taken in regard to this scheme : (a) UGC should initiate a review of the functioning of Autonomous Departments during 1992-93; (b) Departments receiving financial assistance from the Commission under the Special Assis tance Programmes (SAP) and the Scheme of Strengthening of lnfrastructural Facilities in Science & Technology (COSIST) should be granted autonomy in a phased manner by 1997. (c) Departments offering professional and techni cal courses, such as, Engineering, Technology, Computer, Management, Law, etc. and other emerging areas should be targetted for grant of autonomy during the Eighth Plan. ' (d) The progress of the scheme of autonomous departments should also be reviewed by the Cell established in UGC for review of the scheme of autonomous colleges. 6. DESIGN OF COL'!'~ES 11.6.1 Higher Education Programmes have to be redesigned to meet the growing demands of specialisation, to provide flexibility in the combination of courses, to facilitate mobility among courses, programmes and institu tions, to update and modernise curricula, to integrate work/practical experience and participation in creative ac tivities with the learning processes, and to facilitate reforms in the evaluation procedure. The present rigid structures do not permit these reforms. 11.6.2 UGC has sought to redesign courses by (i) issuing guidelint:S for restructuring of courses at first degree level in the faculties of Arts, Social Sciences and Sciences in universities and colleges during the 5th and 6th Plans; and (ii) by establishing 27 Curriculum Development Centres (CDCs) to prepare model curricula in Science, Humanities and Social Sciences during the 7th Plan. 11.6.3 The scheme of restructuring of undergraduate cour ses was last revised by the Commission in 1983. UptO the end of the 7th Plan only 9 universities and 290 colleges had   
restructured undergraduate courses in accordance with these guidelines. The Bachelor's degree programme of In dira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) has been designed on the lines suggested by UGC and consists of inter-disciplinary .foundation courses. core courses and ap plicat.iQn arien.ted courses. The lack of momentum in im plementation of the scheme could be attributed to non availability of specialised teachers,limitedopportunities for practical training and the ~sence of clear linkages between these courses and improved job prospects. 11.6.4 The Commission provided about Rs. 3.5 crore to universities and colleges during the 7th Plan period for im plementation of the scheme of restructuring of courses. 11.6.5 The 27 CDCs established by the Commission in dif ferent universities in the country since 1986 have under taken a very comprehensive exercise to prepare model curricula in 27 subjects. These have been circulated to all the universitie,S for adoption/adaptation. However, no mechanism has so far been created to monitor action taken in this regard at the university level. 11.6.6 In order to achieve the objective of redesigning of courses and introducing' vocational courses the following recommendations are made : i) The massive effort involved in developing model cQITicqla by CDCs should be made full use of by the university system and a mechanism should be immediately created iit UGC to monitor the adoption/adaptation of the revised curricula by universities and colleges; ii) UGC should ensure updation of the model cur ricula at least once in five years; iii) ,YGC's existing guidelines for restructuring of undergraduate courses, which were formulated more than a decade ago, should be comprehen sively revised ~y 1993-94 with a view to incor porating latest developments, particularly in the field of Science & Technology. emerging employment trends, and concerns regarding value education; iv) An effort should be made to expose all students at the first degree level to the world of work by including application-oriented courses in the curriculum and providing for opportunities for project and field work; v) The Committee set up by the Commission to prepare model curricula for Vocational subjects at the undergraduate level for students from the +2 vocational stream should complete its work at the earliest so that the courses recommended by them could be introduced by universities in the academic session 1993-94. The introduction 65 of vocational courses ought to be preceded by a realistic assessment of the requirement of qualified ~hers, laboratory/workshop etc. to ensure tha,Y students who offer these courses graduaty-With the knowledge and skills required by the( market; vi) Given the difficulties and cost of providing workshop and training facilities in universities and colleges for vocational courses, arrange-, ments may be worked out by individual institu-· tions with external agencies for imparting practical training to students who offer such courses; vii) In future the emphasis should be on develop ment· of integrated Honours Courses in voca tional subjects rather than optional vocational courses which do not enhance job orospects suf fiCiently; viii) In view of the popularity of the modular cour ses introduced by IGNOU with provision for accumulation of credits and multiple entry and exit, and the need for encouraging mobility be tween the conventional and the open univer ~· a concerted effort should be made by the conventional universities to develop courses on a modular basis in the 8th Plan; ix) As admissions to all post-graduate courses are sought to be made on a selective basis and restricted to capacity, postgraduate depart ments of all universities should gradually switch over to the semester, grading, con tinuous evaluation and credit systems; x) UGC may consult the States with a view to . making adoption of the semester, grading, credit and internal evaluation systems by new universities and colleges should be a condition precedent for eligibility of grants from UGC. xi) The rigidity in age and other requirements for admission to postgraduate courses should be gradually dispensed with to enable ' ,lrking peopl.e to enrol in such courses in great~r num bers. This would in tum lead to. postgraduate courses being re-oriented to the world of work. However. the increase in age limit for admis sions to post-graduate courses should not result in any relaxation in the age limit for eligibility for elections to the students' Union. xii) The recommendation of Gnanam Committee on restructuring of Boards of Studies in univer sities should be implemented as and when con sidered and approved by the CABE. • 7. TEACHERS' 1RAINING 11.7.1 In pursuance of NPE, 1986 and its POA, 1986 Central Government and UGC have taken several steps to improve the status and motivation of University and college teachers. These include revision of their pay scales, creation of avenues for career advancement linked with perfor mance, incentives for research, provision of training oppor tunities, etc. 11.7.2 In 1987-88, UGC formulated a Scheme of Academic Staff Colleges (ASCs) for organising oriefuatiw:t programme.~ for newly appointed lecturers and co~;tductirig, refresher courses for in-service teachers. UGC has estab lished 48 ASCs in different universities so far. In· l988-89 UGC initiated a programme for identifying University Departments for conducting subject-oritented refresher courses for in-service teachers and have identified 200 University Departments for the purpose. Nearly 13,000 teachers have attended orientation and refresher program mes in ASCs and university deparunents. 11.7 .3 In 1991, the Scheme of ASCs was reviewed by an Expert Committee set up by UGC. While recommending the continuation of the scheme, the Committee made the fol lowing major suggestions: i) In order to ensure proper «Hvelopment of both orientation and subject refresher programmes, short and long-term plans for academic staff colleges may be prepared on a regular basis and proper policy directions may be given from time to time. ii) The innovations being carried out by academic staff colleges and reading and reference material developed by them should be properly coordinated so as to avoid duplication and help sharing the benefits of each others' efforts. iii) The progress of academic staff colleges should be regularly monitored . through quantitative and qualitative information. Based on such analysis, necessary feedback may be given to academic staff colleges for their future working of academic staff colleges. For carry ; ing out these activities, a consortium of academic staff colleges may be set up in close collaboration with NIEPA. The details of Con sortium may be jointly worked out by UGC and NIEPA; for this purpose NIEPA and UGC may enter into a memorandum of understanding. UGC has accepted the recommendations of the Committee and decided to continue the scheme of ASCs during the 8th Plan. 11.7 .4 In order to improve and strengthen the programmes ofteachers'tnlining the following proposals are made: working of academic staff colleges. For carry ; ing out these activities, a consortium of academic staff colleges may be set up in close collaboration with NIEPA. The details of Con sortium may be jointly worked out by UGC and NIEPA; for this purpose NIEPA and UGC may enter into a memorandum of understanding. UGC has accepted the recommendations of the Committee and decided to continue the scheme of ASCs during the 8th Plan. 11.7 .4 In order to improve and strengthen the programmes ofteachers'tnlining the following proposals are made: i) The recommendations of the UGC Review Committee on Academic Staff Colleges should be implemented at the earliest; ii) Before considering further expansion of Academic Staff Colleges, UGC and the univer sities concerned should take measures for con solidation and strengthening of the existing ASCs; iii) Efforts should be made to initiate training and orientation of teachers in Engineering and tech nical subjects; iv). UGC should undertake a five yearly review of the performance of ASCs; v) Keeping in view the popularity of IGNOU's Diplomas in Distance Education and Higbee Education, suitable distance education programmes should be designed for upgrading knowledge and skills of teachers in institutions of higher education. vi) Efforts of UGC · and IGNOU for training of teachers should be integrated and coordinated. For instance ASCs could organise contact programmes for those teachers who are enrolled in IGNOU' s Diplomas in Distance and Higbee Education. 8. RESEARCH IN UNIVERSITIES 11.8.1 During the Seventh Plan, the Commission provideG· Rs. 133 crore, which is 23% of its total plan expenditure for research and developnient Co-operative research facilities have been established by UGC i.nhigh priority areas through the Inter University Centres. and $lepS are under way toes tablish two more Centres. Aotive·participation of Univer sities in industrial research has not materialised on a large scale. However, some universities have established effec tive linkages with industry. UGC is supporting 111 depart ments so far under the scheme of "Strengthening of xiii) In view of the fact that autonomous coUeges and departments are seen as m~r vehicles for restructuring of courses, teachers in such in stitutions/dep8rtments should be given incen tives and special orientation/training through refresher courses to equip them with necessary skiDs to design vocational courses and revise curricula. xiv) Encourage establishment of community col leges dealing with vocationalisation of subjects related to service sector on line with community polytechnics. 66 developoment. iv) A mechanism should also be created for net working of academic staff colleges. For carry ; ing out these activities, a consortium of academic staff colleges may be set up in close collaboration with NIEPA. The details of Con sortium may be jointly worked out by UGC and NIEPA; for this purpose NIEPA and UGC may enter into a memorandum of understanding. UGC has accepted the recommendations of the Committee and decided to continue the scheme of ASCs during the 8th Plan. 11.7 .4 In order to improve and strengthen the programmes ofteachers'tnlining the following proposals are made: Infrastructure in Science & Technology" (COSIST)~ One of the pre-conditims for support under the scheme is that the grantee depart,ments should change over to a method of teaching more conducive to students' learning and qeativity and adopt new procedures for experimental work, project and field work. This is expected to sensitise Postgraduate students to research methodology and train ing. Since 1984 the Commission has been conducting na tionallevel tests for selection_ of Junior Research Fellows (JRFs). F<r Science subjects such tests are organised in col laboration with CSIR. The Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), signed between UGC and CSIR in 1991, provides scientists in universities access to the research facilities in CSIR and vice-versa. 11.8.2 The following recommendations are made for promotion of research in Universities: i) University-Industry linkages should be estab lished on a priority basis in metropolitan areas, cities and regions with a concentration of in dustry; ii) UGC should initiate a scheme of providing in centives to universities which are successful in estasblishing effective linkages with industry; iii) Efforts should be made to increase-the flow of research funds to ~ university sector; iv) Inter-institutional links between universities in India and "state of the art" research institutions abroad should be established to facilitate basic research in priooty m:eas; v) Sophisticated and expensive equipment, which is used by different departments within the same University, should be put to optimal use rather than duplicating such facilities in each department; vi) Journals are essential f<r good quality research. Due to the steep depreciation in the value of the Rupee in the past 2-3 years, many universities are unable to continue subscription to essential journals. There is an urgent need to augment resources to ensure continuance of subscription to journals, particularly in Science, Technology and emerging areas; and to work out modalities for exchange of journals between universities situated in close proximity; vii) Full advantage should be taken by the univer sities of the facilities available at the National Centre for Science lnf<rmation at Indian In stitute of Science, Bangalore and the Informa tion Centres in Humanities and Social Sciences at M.S. University of Baroda and SNDT Women's University, Bombay; 67 viii) A high powered Committee should be con stituted by UGC, with representatives of DST, CSIR, ICSSR, ICHR, etc. to assess the quality of research in our universities; and ix) The Commission has nurtured about 200 Science and Technology departments under SAP and COSIST. These schemes should be merged during the 8th Plan and departments which have been assisted under these schemes should serve as focal points for coordinating re search in frontier areas and training scientists in other universities/colleges in research methodology, etc. x) New Inter-University Centres for research should be established in Humanities and Social Sciences. 9. PROMOTION OF SCIENCE EDUCA TIO~ IN UNIVERSITIES 11.9.1 Some of the notable steps taken by the UGC npto the end of 7th Five Year Plan for promotion of science education and.research include: i) Of the general development grants (Rs.103.00 crore) provided to Universities, Rs. 42.00 crore was for development of science infrastructure; ii) Under the scheme of COSIST, 111 University departments have been provided Rs. 37.40 · crore for strengthening of teaching and re search; iii) Upto the end of 7th Plan, 200 University depart ments in Science & Technology have been provided Rs. 26.80 crore under th~ Special As sistance Programme (SAP); iv) ·Inter-University Centres--in Nuclear Science, Astronomy, Astrophysics, MSD Radar, and Crystal Growth have been established at a cost of Rs. 26.00 crore. 11.9.2 In addition to the above, the Commission has provided supPort for introducing courses in etnerging areas like, Bio-technology, Ocean Development, Electronics, Computers, etc., as well as for research in super~conduc­ tivity, up-keep of University Services Instrumentation Centres and fellc;>wships/salary to Research Fellows, Research Associates and Scientists. 11.9.3 While UGC would continue to provide support on the above lines to science education and research, the fol lowing recommendations are made for promotion of science education: a) In the long-term a special Sub Plan should be prepared by UGC, in consultation with Depart ment of Science & Technclo~v r.nd State Governments, for equipping deficient science laboratories in Universities and Colleges in a phased manner by 2000 A.D. Steps should al~ be taken for removal of obsolescence and re placement of fragile equipment. b) In the short-term, UGC should consider equip ping adeast one science college in every district of the country with a modem laboratory quring the 8d_l Plan. c) There ing to is science an urgent teachers need to to provide keep them special abreast train with the latest developments in their areas of specialisation. UGC should work out a strategy iu(I()Daboration with the DePiflment of Science and Technology, for meeting the training needs of science teachers on a priority basis. lQ. INR>RMATIONTECHNOLOGY 11.10.1 UGC has been providing assistance to universities for setting up computer facilities and establishment of Com puter Centres. Upto 1990-91, 105 Universities have been provided with Computer Systems and 948 Colleges with personal computers., The Commission has also been assist I'UIIDin& iilg Univmities seymatmanpower under the UGC-DOE development Joint courses Programme in the field for ofalin~SCience. . N"Ctwo.._i 11)0.2 Ute (lt'WLIBNET) had decided with to set a up view Information to promoting and Library and es tablisJlilfjJ/c;ommunication facilities so as to improve capabilitY in infOrmation transfer and access; for linking Libraries and Information Centres in Universities, Institu tions of National Importance, etc. 11. IMPROVING EFFICIENCY reprct U.H.l to POA, improv~elit 1986 mide in the several functioning recommendations of higher educa in don institutions and outlines responsibilities of Govern ment, institutions, teachers and students in this regard. In pursuance of the recommendations contained in NPE 1986 IDd POA 1986, the UGC has circulated the following pidelines/reports to the State Governments and Univer sities with a view to bringing about improvements in the functioning of the higher education system : (iv) Report of the Task Force on Code of Profes sional Ethics for University and College teachers (1989); {v) Report of the Committee on Academic Calen dar in universities and colleges (1989). 11.11.2 Though the UGC has made serious efforts to im prove the functioning of the universities and colleges through the above guidelines/reports, the implementation has not been satisfactory. Various factors are responsible for the slow progress, viz.  Absence of appropriate mechanisms at the Central and State level to oversee the implemen tation of UGC's guidelines and recommenda tions;  Reluctance of educational institutions and the aclijlemic community to change;  Excessive politicisation of universities and indis cipline on campus. 11.11.3 The UGC bas recently recognised its internal functionma on the iiisis of the recommendations made by the Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI), Hyderabad. The Commission has also undertaken a com prehensive review of its schemes with a view to consolidat ing, reducdug of overlap and duplication, and strengthening of priority schemes. It is recommended that all universities should undertake similar reviews within the next year ( 1993-94) to bring about greater effiCiency in their function ing. It is also necessary for each university to set up an in ternal mechanism to review its working on a continuing basis. 11.11.4 In order to improve the internal efficiency of the in stitutions of higher education, it is necessary to provide op portunities for professional development of University and College administrators. Recognising this, the Department of EducationconstitutedaCommitteeinJanuary,1991,tosug gest measures for the augmentation of training facilities for university and college administrators. The Committee has completed its worlc and is expected to submit its report to Government soon. 11.11.5 Measures to improve the efficiency of Universities should focus on : a) Early implementation of the report of the Com mittee for augmenting of training facilities for university and college administrators; b) Establishment of autonomous departments and units to decentralise administrative, academic, and financial powers in universities; and c) Setting up of effective grievance redressal ·~ (i) Guidelines on Terms and Conditions of Affilia"' tion of Colleges by a University (1987); (ii) Guidelines on Minimum number of actual teaching days, Programme of examination reform and Workload for teachers in Univer sities and Colleges (1988); · (iii) Report of the Task Force on ··Performance Ap praisal of Tea,chers { 1988); 68 a) Early implementation of the report of the Com mittee for augmenting of training facilities for university and college administrators; b) Establishment of autonomous departments and units to decentralise administrative, academic, and financial powers in universities; and c) Setting up of effective grievance redressal a) Early implementation of the report of the Com mittee for augmenting of training facilities for university and college administrators; b) Establishment of autonomous departments and units to decentralise administrative, academic, and financial powers in universities; and c) Setting up of effective grievance redressal machinery. -. 12. CREATION OF MACHINERIES FOR COORD INA TED DEVELOPMENT (a) State Councils of Higher Education 11.12.1 The Policy envisages establishment of State Coun cils of Higl}er Education for : * State level planning * Coordination of plans and programmes within the State arid with UGC for maintenance of standards. In pursuance of the recommendations in the Policy and Programme of Action, UGC issued guidelines to State Governments and Universities for establishment of SCHE's. The guidelines provide for the composition, powers and functions of the Councils. Despite persistent ef forts on the part of the Department of Education and UGC to persuade State Governments «> establish SCHEs, only one State i.e. Andhra Pradesh has set up a SCHE so far. Three more States are actively coosidering setting up of SCHEs. The slow progress of the scheme could be mainly attributed to the apprehensions of State Governments and Directorates of College Education regarding transfer of ~eir powers and functions to SCHEs and the non-availability of resources for establishing these bodies. 11.12.2 Early· establishment of SCHEs is critical for giving impetus to long term planning in Higher Education. The role envisaged for SCHE is spelt out in para 4.6. The Govern ment and UOC would persuade State Governments to set up SCHEs during the 8th Plan. (b) National Apex Body 11.12.3 The NPE, 1986 envisages establishment of a Na tional Apex Body for bringing about greater cordination and integration in the planning and development of higher education system, including research. A proposal for estab lishing a National Council for Higher Education (NCHE) was prepared in consultation with concerned.Ministries and Agencies. However, a consensus could not be reached on the structure. and functions. Efforts would be made to operationalise a National Apex Body as early as possible. (c) Accreditation and Assessment Machinery 11.12.4 In March, 1992 UGC resolved to set up a National Accreditation and Assessment Council as an autonomous body for the achievement of the objectives envisaged in the NPE. Government would take an early view on UGC's proposal. 13. MOBILITY 11.13.1 The NPE, 1986 visualises measures to facilitate inter-regional mobility by providing equal access to every Indian of requisite merit regardless of h'" c-tigin and em 69 phasises the universal character of a university. To achieve this objective, the POA recommended that the State Governments and Universities would be encouraged lo admit students based on merit without any regard to domicile or nativity. Schemes to provide necessary support and guidance to institutions to admit students from other States would be evolved. In order that the all India charac ter in the composition of the student enrolptent and faculty strength is ensured, priority will be given to schemes for c.onstruction of lludent hostels, staff quarters, provision of scholarships, etc. Efforts will be made to move towards the objective of making recruitment of teachers on all·lildia basis in consultation with the State Governments. 11.13.2 The scheme formulated by Government in 1987 for revision of pay scales of University and College teachers, inter-alia, provides that recruitment of teachers should be made on merit Oil an All India basis through open advertise me~ In pursuance of this, UGC has evolved a national eligibiiity test for selection of lecturers in Universities and Colleges. The liberalisation ofUGC's norms for providing fmancial assistance for construction of hostels in the 8th Plan should facilitate student mobility in the long nm. 11.13.3 To further enhance the mobility of faculty and stu dentS, the following proposals are made: i) UGC and State Governments should C11C0Ur9 Universities to provide for an additional · t(KQ seats on a supernumerary basis in eac:ll postgraduate depa~tment for children of employet;s with all India transfer liability and non-residents; and ii) To facilitate inter-state mobility of teachers, the Central Government should modify its mobility orders at the earliest to provide· that teachers who move from one State University~ollege to IIIIDther should be permitted to carry forward the '\enefit of past services for retirement benefits, as in the case of employees moving from Central Government/Autonomous Bodies to State Government/Autonomous Bodies aqd vice .. versa ) " 14. FINANCE$ 11.14.1 Higher Education has a crucial role in training mao. power for nation81 development It is therefore necessary to provide it with adequate support and finances to: i) maintain its infrastructure and establishment at an acceptable level; ii) to bep abreast with latest developments; and iii) meet future challenges. . .. .. · 11.14.2 In this context, it has become necessary for the • stitutions of higher learning to consider measures for rais ;r., .. , ing internal resources and improving their cost efficiency. While there is a case for raising tuition and other charges, which have remained more or less static for the past forty five years, an elaborate and effective system should be es tablished for providing freeships, scholarships, and loans to students belonging to the weaker sections of society. Efforts should also be made to evolve rational norms for providing grants to universities which should take into account per capita cost, teacher -student ratio, proportion of teaching and non-teaching staff, types of courses offered, costing of ser vices and extent of their subsidisation, ratio of graduate and postgraduate/ research students, etc. There is need for a balanced distribution of resources between universities and research institutions. 11.14.3 A High Powered Committee would be set up to con sider steps for mobilisation of additional resources for higher education, to bring about a better balance in the fund ing of institutions for higher education and research, and to improve the cost efficiency of the university system. 70 15. REVIEW AND MONITORING 11.15.1 The necessity for establishing effectiv~ mechanisms for a continuous review and monitoring of the Programme of Action was recognised. The following recommendations are made : i) The Commission should initiate the practice of reviewing one major scheme in every meeting and make recommendations for bringing about improvements; ii) The recommendations of the Commission should be made available to the CABE for review. iii) At the State level the SCHEs and SABEs would play roles corresponding to UGC and CABE. ;..,) At the institutional level, affdiating Univer sities should be entrusted with this task.   
 . 12. OPEN EDUCATION , ft.l.l .. The open learning system auamenaa opportunities a f~tion,ensuresaccess, ..... t. flexible and innovative iscost-effec:aiveand system of education. J)I'OID<*S The inicial experien<:o of the Indira Gandhi National Open Univemty weD as the Natimai (tGNOU) Open and khoolundedines abe Slate Open Universities, the tremendoUs as pofeAiial of the open learn~ systeM. 2. 11m OPEN UNIVERSITY SYSTEM proJtafiilnes 122.1 The in IGNOU 1987 has whieb made launched significant its progreu. academic The University pn!sendy otfen Badlolor's degree programmes in 13 disciplines, aMaster'sdegreeinBuaineu Administra anauat tion. Rl enrolment several diploma has illCl'eS3ed and certifi<:ate from about programmes. 4400 ·in 1987 The ro ·universities Pradesh students O¥lt MablrUhlril namely, the Y _ 62,000 ashwantrao (BRAOU), in Dr. i992. and B.R. in (YCMOU) institutes 1992. The Chavan Am~ tht distance The lea tbgether Mahal:ashtla of three Corresj,ondence Open Open educa&ion State admitted University UniverSity Ofbt Opeft instibltions about University Education Univ~ties, (KOU) in Andhnl 65.(n) (open and of in conventional universities) accounted for about 11.S% of the enrolment in higher education in 1990-91. areas 12.2.2 are Several being new developed programmes by the in IGNOU. employment-related Advanced Diploma programmes· in Construction Management. Ad vanced Diploma in Irrigation and Water Resources, Postgraduate Diploma in Journalism and Mass Com .oe,ree Science munication. in are Distance some Bachelor's of Educ::ation the Degree new programmes and in Library Nursing and under and lnfennation Master's develop ment by the IGNOU. The State Open Universities have also launc::hed Horticulture, a ttumber -Education of relevant and Communica programmes lion in Elec::tronics, besides the diploma and degree programmes in Humanities, Commerce and Social Scienees. The Directorates of Correspondence Education of thC-oonventional universities have alsri been diver sifying me:a:programmes. These institutions are prasendy offering a large-number of diploma and certificate pro&rammes . in technical/professional , areas. 12.23 The IGNOU has set up a D$anc::e Education Coun . cil.a a statutory body for the promotion, coordination and ~ination of s.tandards of the Open university/distance educ::ation system. * The Di$tance Education Council will take steps for odletllis ing lietworWfilill,the'State courses ~utatjon anct-programmes, Open institutions, arid Universities devel<>Ping for shar and a I 1 ;_ -: 'vl/o. If I{ 1>/95 pattern and structure for the apen uni~rsity . programmes that would facilitate student mobility among programmes as well as institu tions .. * The open university/distance education programmes would be SU'11Ctured on a modular pattern with provision for rransfer of credits. Students will have the facility of registering for courses of their choice which, in appropriate combinacions, will enable them to obtain cer tificates, diplomas or degrees. * The courage , Distance joint deve~tof~mes Education Council will en and courses by IGNOU, State -Open Universi~ and the Directorates of Correspond enceEduca lion of conventional universities. * It will also recommend -filianCial assistance from IGNOU to state open universities for their development and for !undertaking specific projects. * It will initiate steps to organise programmes of train ing for the development of human resour ces for the open university/distance education system especially in such areas as course development and production. organisa lion of support services, etc. The possibility of estab lishing instibltional mechanisms for this pur pose wiD be explored. 12.2.4 The Distance Ed~ncil will ultimately aS sume the responsibility for developing the existing cor respondenceeducation programmes on a selective basis and convMing them into distance education programmes of an acceptable quality. However, for the ~me being, the respon sibility for the development of distance education program mes in the conventional univer sititl-;will remain with the UGC.There would be close consultation between the UGC and the IGNOU in the development ofsuch programmes. 12.2.5 Electronic media will be progressively involved in the expansion of open learning. Doordarshan is already telecasting programmes of the IGNOU three days a week for 30 minutes from 6.30 to 7.00 a.m. The AIR stations of Hyderabad and Bombay are broadcasting selected IGNOU programmes. The Hyderabad station of All India Radio has set up a transmission netWork in Andhra Pradesh for broad caSting the programmes offered by the BRAOU. A few of the Institutes of Correspondence Education have made ar rangements lessons. Distance with the edu~tion All India requires Radio as for a broadcasting matter of prereq their ..... 12 uisite multimedia instruction and its success will substan tially depend on the availability of facilities for broadcast ing and telecasting. Efforts will be made dming the Eighth Plan period to augment and network these facilities so that. these programmes can reach a larger number of students. 12.2.6 Measures will be taken to promote the mobility of students among Open Universities and among the tradition al universities and open universities: A significant develop ment in this regard is the sigmog of die Memonmdum of Understanding between the University of Pondicherry and the IGNOU which provides for recognition of each other's degrees and diplomas as \Yell as transfer of credits for cour ses universities. successfully Efforts completed will be made by students to promote between similar the arran two gements with other pniverSities. 12.2.7 The recommendation of the Central Advisory Board of Education (CABE) that each State should estab lish an ,open university will be pursued with the State Governments for implementation during the Eighth Plan. The IGNOU will provide technical and consultancy support Education to the State Council Governments will prepare for this guidelines purpose. for The providing Distance financial support to State Open Universities for their development. Such assistance will include suppon to develop new programmes and courses. The course materials already produced by the IGNOU and other open universities ·. wouf'd be wbich could made offer available them through to new the State languages Open of Universities the region $0 that access to open university programmes is widened. In order to promOte the open university system on a significant scale, the existing rules framed by the UGC for declaring open univPJ"Sities fit for central assistance will be reviewed 3. The OPEN SCHOOL SYSTEM 12.3.1 The National Open School (NOS) already estab lished, will be sttengthened and developed to widen access to education at the Secondary and Higher Secondary levels. ·Efforts will be made to establish Open Schools in different States so that secondary education is significantly expanded through different regional languages. 12.3.2 The posSibility of launching vocational education progra!Jlmt;S through the open learning system will be ex plored•. For this purpose, meaningful linkages will be es tablished wjth workstations, "industries and other organisations. Such bilateral initiatives will help administer the theoretical and practical components of the vocational education packages. 12.3.3 The possibility of setting up a national consortium on open schooling will be explored in order to initiate coor . dinated steps in such areas as policy issues; priorities, long · term national ~ state needs, establishment of Resource centres for development of materials, development of "' See para 10.4.18 of Chapter 10 Vocational Education human resources for the open learning system, monitoring and evaluation of its perfonn ance, etc. 4. EMPLOYMENT RELATED EDUCATION 12.4.1 The open learning system at the secondary aM ter tiary levels wiU focus attention on education and training in areas related to employment and se1f-emp1oymenl tt will seek the involvement of the existing institutions and-or ganisations in commerce, industry, the service sectOrs as well as rural development organisations, including the mobilisation of the material and human resources in such organisatiQns in the development of appropriate program mes and their delivery. Efforts will be made todevelopc1ose cooperation and collaboration between open education in stitutions and the agencies which use trained manpow er both in the public and the. private sectors as 'Well as the professional otganisations in various fields. 12.4.2 The open learning system will take steps to meet the continuing education needs of the manpower already employed in different sectors. It will help develop program mes in close cooperation with the concerned employing or ganisations for !raining and retraining of manpower, for the upgradation of skills for appli~tion of new technologies and also in providing opponuni ties to serving perSonnt;J to improve their qualifications for their professional advance menL The open learning system will seek the support and cooperation of a wide spectrum of employers in the fulfil ment of these objectives. 5. TARGETS AND RESOURCES 12.5.1 During the Eighth Plan period, the enrolment in the open university/distance education system is expected to in crease from about 11 '\% of the total enrolment in higher education to about 16.5%. In absolute terms, this wopld in volve a net addition of 4 lakhs students to the enrolment in the open university/distance education system by the end of the Eighth Plan. The open learning system at the Secondary and Higher Secondary level is expected to enrol an addition al6 lakh students during the Eighth Plan Period. 12.5.2 It is important that the cost-effectiveness of the open learning system iS maintained. The strategy for this purpose will Include : • Involvement of the material and manpower resources of the user agencies in the develop ment of programmes and courses for the open learning system and in the deliv ery of various . services to students through establish ment of Study Centres at the work place, involvement of employers in tutorials, counselling, etc. "' A system of differential fees under which the level of fees will be determined on the basis of the objectives of the programmes, the target • •