Recommendations on the Guidelines for Implementation of Programmes and Schemes under Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP) and Tribal Sub Plan (TSP) in the Ministry of Human Resource Development Standing Committee of National Monitoring Committee on Education Development of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Ministry of Human Resource Development Acknowledgement On behalf of all members of the Standing Committee, I thank all the individuals and institutions who have contributed to the whole process of consultation and preparation of this report on ‘Recommendations on the Guidelines for Implementation of Programmes and Schemes under Scheduled Castes Sub Plan and Tribal Sub Plan in the Ministry of Human Resource Development’. First and foremost, I would like to acknowledge the contributions of all the representatives of different institutions, universities and ministries who took time to be present at our consultations and share their valuable insights on the implementation of Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP) and Tribal Sub Plan (TSP) in the programmes and schemes run by the Ministry of Human Resource Development. My special thanks also go to R C Gandhi, Krishnan P S, Madhav Rao and Subbiah Sankaran for contributing their expertise towards preparing this entire report. I would also like to acknowledge the efforts of the National Campaign on Dalit Human Rights (NCDHR), Centre for Social Equity and Inclusion (CSEI), Indian Institute of Dalit Studies (IIDS) and particularly Paul Divakar, Annie Namala, Jayashree S Prasad, Abhaya Xaxa, Nidhi Sadana Sabharwal, and Dr C S Meena (University Grants Commission) who have tirelessly worked to make this report possible. My heartfelt thanks also go to the officials from the governments of Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra. Last but not the least, I am thankful to Shri R C Meena, Economic Advisor Ministry of Human Resource Development, and Member Secretary for Standing Committee for his constant support and guidance. Sukhadeo Thorat Chairman, Standing Committee 2 Contents Section 1: Background: Special Component Plan for Scheduled Castes and Tribal Sub Plan for Scheduled Tribes Beginning with Sixth Plan (1985-90) 4 Section 2: Initiative by Ministry of Human Resource Development Constitution of National Monitoring Committee for Educational Development of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Persons with Disabilities 8 Section 3: Issues Related to Higher and School Education of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 11 Section 4: Recommendations Related to General Guidelines for Effective Implementation of SCSP and TSP 15 Section 5: Recommendations Related to General Guidelines for Implementation of SCSP and TSP in Higher Education Sector 23 Section 6: Recommendations Related to General Guidelines for Implementation of SCSP and TSP in School Education Sector 35 Annexures Annexure 1: The Schemes in School and Higher Education Sector 45 Annexure 2: The Current Educational Problems of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in School Education Sector 53 Annexure 3: The Current Educational Problems of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Higher Education Sector 56 Annexure 4: Tables 63 3 Section 1 Background: Special Component Plan for Scheduled Castes and Tribal Sub Plan for Scheduled Tribes Beginning with Sixth Plan (1985-90) The strategy of Tribal Sub Plan (TSP) has been in force since 1974, to ensure adequate flow of plan resources for the development of Scheduled Tribes, while the strategy of Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP) (earlier known as the Special Component Plan for Scheduled Castes) has been in force since 1979-80, to ensure proportionate flow of plan resources for the development of Scheduled Castes. The current name, i.e., Scheduled Castes Sub Plan has been in force since 2006. The Prime Minister, in his address to the 51st Meeting of the National Development Council on 27.6.2005 had inter alia stated that: “If the benefits of growth have to reach all sections of our diverse society, there is a need to equip them with the necessary skills and resources to become active participants in growth processes. This is the only way of achieving our dream of an inclusive, prosperous society. In the mid-1970s, the Special Component Plan and the Tribal Sub Plan were initiated. Tribal Sub Plans and Special Component Plans should be an integral part of Annual Plans as well as Five Year Plans, making provisions therein non-divertible and non-lapsable, with the clear objective of bridging the gap in socio-economic development of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes within a period of 10 years.” Fresh Guidelines for SCSP and TSP in the Eleventh Five Year Plan As a follow-up to the Prime Minister’s address, guidelines were framed by the Planning Commission on the formulation, implementation and monitoring of SCSP and TSP, and issued to 62 Central Ministries/Departments in December, 2006 for the Eleventh Five Year Plan beginning with the Annual Plan 2007-08. The guidelines required the 62 Central Ministries/Departments to a) earmark funds under SCSP and TSP from the plan outlay at least in proportion to the percentage of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe population in the country, which was 16.2 per cent and 8.2 per cent respectively as per the Census of India 2001. b) place the funds earmarked for SCSP and TSP under a separate Minor Head ‘789’ and ‘796’ to ensure their non-diversion to any other scheme. c) include only those schemes under SCSP and TSP which ensure direct benefits to individuals or families belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. d) only include in the SCSP and TSP outlay for area-oriented schemes which directly 4 benefit hamlets/villages which have more than 40 per cent Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes population. As regards the monitoring mechanism, a. a dedicated unit to be constituted in every Central Ministry/Department for the welfare and development of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes as nodal unit for formulation and implementation of SCSP and TSP. The nodal unit should be responsible for ensuring that the funds will be allocated to the sectoral unit in the Departments to implement the schemes directly relevant for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes development. b. a Central Tripartite Committee (CTC), constituted in the Planning Commission in 1999 under the Chairmanship of Member (BCW), to review the implementation of SCSP and TSP, and to resolve policy issues in respect of Central Ministries/Departments and State Governments. Planning Commission Task Force’s Guidelines on SCSP and TSP and Recommendations – 2010 Concerns were expressed about the effective implementation of the SCSP and TSP in 2010. To address these concerns and to develop more effective mechanisms, the Planning Commission had set up a Task Force under the Chairmanship of Narendra Jadhav, Member, Planning Commission, in charge of the Social Sector to review the previous guidelines and its implementation and to make recommendations for the effective implementation of SCSP and TSP. The Jadhav Committee pointed out inadequacies in the implementation of SCSP and TSP. It observed that most of the Central Ministries did not indicate its SCSP and TSP outlays under separate budget heads. Some ministries showed a notional earmarking, but the criterion followed in doing so is not uniform and transparent. Moreover, in the absence of this outlay being shown under a separate minor head (789 or 796, as the case may be), such notional earmarking does not have much significance, nor is its non-diversion ensured. In the absence of separate earmarking and budgeting of funds under SCSP and TSP by the Central Ministries/Departments, it has not been possible to quantify the total amount allocated and/or spent by the Central Government under SCSP and TSP. Due to the lack of an effective mechanism, the SCSP and TSP strategies were substantially unimplemented at the level of the Central Ministries/Departments. The Narendra Jadhav Task Force made suggestions for improvement. It suggested: a) First, that 25 Ministries/Departments under SCSP and 28 Ministries/Departments under TSP allocate funds in three categories, that is less that 16.2 per cent and 8.2 per cent under SCSP and TSP respectively; which is equal to 16.2 per cent and 8.2 per 5 cent under SCSP and TSP respectively; and more than 16.2 per cent and 8.2 per cent for SCSP and TSP respectively. Ministries which are engaged in regulatory functions, basic scientific research implementation, larger scale infrastructure projects and central organisations without any beneficiary orientations are not obliged to earmark funds under SCSP and TSP. Forty-three ministries and 40 ministries are exempted from SCSP and TSP respectively. b) Second, strict adherence to Minor head code of 789 and 796 for SCSP and TSP respectively. c) Third, strengthening of administrative arrangements for planning and implementation of SCSP and TSP through setting up of nodal units in all the ministries for SCSP and TSP with requisite full-time staff, and a full-time Joint Secretary to head the SCSP and TSP Unit. d) Fourth, implementation of the non-lapsable feature through setting up Non-Lapsable Central Pool of TSP Funds (NLCPTF) and the Non-Lapsable Central Pool of SCSP Funds (NLCPSF). e) Fifth, additional funding of Rs. 8000 crores to fill the gap for Annual Plan of 2011-12, if the guidelines were strictly adhered to. For the first time, the designated 25 Ministries/Departments for SCSP and 28 Ministries/Departments, including the Ministry of Human Resource Development for TSP have allocated the designated amounts as per the Jadhav Task Force guidelines. These Ministries/Departments have also opened the Minor Sub-head 789 and 796 for SCSP and TSP, enabling the amounts to be transparent and traceable. However, the next three recommendations of strengthening the administrative arrangements for planning and implementation of SCSP and TSP; implementation of the non-lapsable feature and the additional funding for the SCSP and TSP to overcome the shortfalls in the allocations as per the Jadhav Committee guidelines have not materialised. The application of Task Force Guidelines would mean that the Ministry of Human Resource Development has to allocate a minimum 20 per cent to SCSP and 10.50 per cent to TSP in the Department of School Education and Literacy; and 15 per cent to SCSP and 7.5 per cent to TSP in the Department of Higher Education–. National Advisory Council Recommendations The National Advisory Council has discussed issues related to SCSP and TSP and has observed that the formulation and implementation of the Sub Plans have been deficient and fallen short of meeting their objective both at the Centre and in the states. After due deliberations, a set of recommendations were formulated and proposed to the Prime Minister on 21 December 2011 for strict implementation. Furthermore, on 3 November 2012, the National Advisory Council suggested fresh guidelines for the implementation of the SCSP 6 and TSP, including an institutional framework. In doing this, the National Advisory Council has elaborated clear roles and responsibilities for effective planning, allocation, utilisation, monitoring, and transparency in the implementation of SCSP and TSP. This new document is viewed as a paradigm shift from ‘accounting’ to ‘planning’ of a special component plan for SCs and STs. These recommendations are referred to while formulating the current guidelines and are annexed in this report for easy reference. 7 Section 2 Initiative by Ministry of Human Resource Development―Constitution of National Monitoring Committee for Educational Development of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Persons with Disabilities Following the directives from the Planning Commission (based on Narendra Jadhav Committee), the Ministry of Human Resource Development has taken an important step by constituting a National Monitoring Committee for Education of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and persons with disabilities with the Union Minister for Human Resource Development as the Chairman, the two Ministers of State as members along with 18 exofficio members, two Lok Sabha Members of Parliament and two Rajya Sabha Nominees from the Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha; 29 activists, NGOs and academics and seven official members, with the Economic Advisor, Department of Higher Education as the Member Secretary. The terms of reference of the Committee are to advise the Government on all matters pertaining to education and its pursuit for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and persons with disabilities and to review the functioning of various schemes launched by the Ministry for the purpose of promoting Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and persons with disabilities in education. The term of the Committee is three years. The task of the Committee is to review the present policies, suggest the measures to improve the implementation and monitoring of the progress and to advise the Ministry of Human Resource Development on policy matter and progress. Standing Committee In order to carry out the objectives of the National Monitoring Committee for Education of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and persons with disabilities, a Standing Committee was constituted on the 27 July 2012 with Prof. Sukhadeo Thorat as the Chairperson, and the Economic Advisor, Department of Higher Education, as the Convener. The mandates of the Standing Committee are: (a) To advise the National Monitoring Committee on the educational development of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and persons with disabilities. (b) To monitor the implementation of the schemes aimed at educational opportunities of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and persons with disabilities. (c) To suggest measures for enhancing their access to inclusive quality education. (d) To guide and advise the separately constituted Task Force from time to time. 8 Together with the Chairperson and the Convener, it has 15 members―three Members of Parliament and the rest activists and academics. Sub-Committee for Drafting the Guidelines for Implementation of the SCSP and TSP In the first meeting of the Standing Committee held on 17 August 2012, it was decided that a sub-Committee should be constituted for drafting the guidelines for implementation of the SCSP and TSP for schemes and programmes of the Ministry of Human Resource Development. Accordingly, two sub-committees were formed. They are: (i) Sub-committee for drafting the guidelines for implementation of the SCSP and TSP for higher education (ii) Sub-committee for drafting the guidelines for implementation of the SCSP and TSP for school education The mandate was to hold consultation with the state governments, collect best practices and have discussion with various programme officers of the Ministry and accordingly draft guidelines for implementation of SCSP and TSP for schemes and programmes of the Ministry of Human Resource Development. Working of the Sub-Committee for Drafting of Guidelines for Implementation of SCSP and TSP The Sub-committee for Drafting of Guidelines for Implementation of SCSP and TSP first met on 30 August 2012 at the Indian Council for Social Science Research, New Delhi to deliberate on the working of the Sub-Committee. The detailed strategy was worked out during this session. Pursuant to this, it held national consultations, expert group visits to the states of Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra, and held one more Sub-Committee meeting for the outline and the frame of the recommendations. Detailed National-Level Consultations: The Sub-committee has organised three nationallevel meetings attended by educational experts, government officials, and representatives of various educational institutions, NGOs and research organisations. After a wide and in-depth deliberation on a wide range of issues, the Sub-committee finally presented concrete recommendations for effective implementation of SCSP and TSP in the schemes and programmes of the Ministry of Human Resource Development. Expert Group Visits to States for Best Practices: An expert group comprising various stakeholders was formed with the initiative of the Chairman, which visited Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu in the month of September and Maharashtra in the month of November to meet various officials and concerned organisations related to the implementation of SCSP and TSP for the educational development of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. These visits were conducted with the aim to collect first-hand information on the ways in which SCSP and TSP are implemented at ground level and the problems faced at various levels by 9 the programme implementers. These visits and consultations have been quite insightful in the sense that a wide range of suggestions have been documented and reflected on by the members of the Sub-committee, which can be framed as policy guidelines in the future implementation of SCSP and TSP in educational development programmes focusing on Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Sub-Committee Meetings: Two meetings of the Sub-committee were held to deliberate on the SCSP and TSP implementation, the challenges thereof, and to consider recommendations for its effective implementation. Based on this extensive deliberation, the Sub-committee prepared the general guidelines for the implementation of SCSP and TSP for school and higher education. The presentation is organised into three sections. The following section presents: (a) Review of the various schemes for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes under SCSP and TSP (b) Present the status of school and higher education of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (c) General guidelines for the implementation of SCSP and TSP in school and higher education under the Ministry of Human Resource Development. 10 Section 3 Issues Related to Higher and School Education of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Before we suggest guidelines for the effective implementation of SCSP and TSP, we present the current problems faced by Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in school and higher education. The details of their problems are discussed in annexures 2 and 3. In this section, we briefly present the main issues related to school and higher education. Issues Related to Higher Education of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Over time, there has been an improvement in the enrolment rate of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in higher education. However, these groups continue to suffer from low access to higher education as compared to high castes. The extent of enrolment is low in rural areas as compared to urban areas. The enrolment rates remain low for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in comparison to higher castes. Further, the enrolment rates predictably remain low among the females than among the males. The enrolment is particularly low among those engaged as wage labourers in rural and urban areas, and particularly poor among them are the females compared to the males. The issues which need attainment under SCSP and TSP relates to the following. a) Low enrolment: Among the social groups, enrolment rates are lower for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes as compared to others. The enrolment rates are still lower in rural areas as compared to urban areas. The enrolment rate is lower among female as compared to males both in rural and urban areas. The gap is particularly is high in rural areas. The enrolment rate is quite low among the poor. Among the livelihood categories, the enrolment rates are quite low among farm and non-farm wage labourers as compared to the self-employed in farms, those engaged in non-farm production and business, and those with regularised salaries. b) Among those who complete higher secondary education, a low proportion joins post-higher secondary education. A high proportion drops out and resorts to diplomas of various durations. c) There are problems possibly related to English language and some core subjects which lead to poor performance and drop out. Therefore, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes need further attention, as lack of suitable support through 11 remedial teaching in English language and core subjects is one of the reasons for poor performance, repeated failure and drop out. c) The discrimination of Dalit students may be another reason for their poor performance in their studies in higher education institutions. d) Financial problems faced by the poor students also affect their access to education, particularly in professional institutions. e) Lack of necessary physical infrastructure such as hostels, study rooms, etc., particularly for the poor students reduce their access to private institutions as they cannot afford private accommodations. Education being a social need for everybody, in a majority of countries, efforts have been made to provide education by public or private providers in a manner such that everybody gets fair access and an opportunity to develop their human capabilities, so that they are able to participate and benefit from the gains of economic development. The economic opportunities in terms of access to resources and income may be unequal, but equal access to higher education and skill to all persons, poor and non-poor, enable the use of economic opportunities on an equal footing. It is in this sense that education serve as an equaliser in unequal societies by offering equal opportunities to everyone to develop their human capabilities.The low access of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to higher education reduces their chances of expanding their human capabilities and eventually places them in a position of disadvantage to use the opportunities offered by economic growth. Unfortunately, the groups with low access to higher education constitute a sizable section of India’s population. Unlike many countries where education has served as an instrument of equal opportunity, in India, by offering unequal access to higher education to poor and marginalised social groups, education has turned out to be the prominent source of economic inequalities. This is a disturbing feature of our higher education system which has been growing at a great pace, with less inclusive privatisation of higher education since the mid 1980s. In 2009-10, of the total students in professional courses such as agriculture, engineering and medicine, about 44 per cent were in private unaided institutions, and the remaining 53.5 per cent in non-private institutions which included government, local body and private-aided institutions. This revealed the magnitude of privatisation of professional education in the country. However, due to the cost factor, the proportion of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in private institutions was lower compared to Other Backward Classes and higher castes. The percentage enrolled in private-unaided institutions was 28 per cent for Scheduled Tribes and 27 per cent for Scheduled Castes as compared to 44 per cent for Other Backward Classes and 49 per cent for higher castes. The low access to private-unaided institutions is reflected in the lower share of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the total number of students enrolled in private-unaided institutions. Of the total students enrolled in private12 unaided professional institutions, the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes account for two per cent and six per cent respectively while Other Backward Classes and higher castes share is 36.25 per cent and 56 per cent respectively. The Other Backward Classes and higher castes thus account 92 per cent of the total students in private-unaided institutions, which is far higher than their share in population, while the share of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes was much lower than their population share. Therefore, we have to give a serious relook at our higher education policy of inclusive education. The state has to own the responsibility to provide higher education to those who deserve and desire, and the participation of private sector should be such that it provide access to education to the poor and disadvantaged sections in society. Policy interventions should recognise the constraints that these groups face in accessing higher education. Therefore, while addressing these constraints, we must develop group-specific interventions and supportive schemes for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes under SCP and TSP. Thus, the issues which need to be addressed under the SCSP and TSP include: increase in enrolment in post-higher secondary level; support to poor students from wage labour households; support to students in their studies for language improvement and some core subjects in college and universities so that the dropout rate is checked; Vocational education support for those who drop out at the higher secondary level; steps to check discrimination in higher education institutions and financial support through scholarships/fellowships, hostel, and study centres. Issues Related to School Education of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes In the school education sector there are specific issues which need attention. Such issues are: a) Enrolment at the elementary level should be more or less at par with others. b) The enrolment ratio, however, drops significantly at secondary and higher secondary levels. Therefore, how to retain a high level of enrolment ratios at these two levels is an issue which needs to be addressed under SCSP and TSP. c) The dropout rate among Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes children (in classes 1 to10) is high. d) The attainment rate (reaching up to higher secondary examination) among the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students is much lower than among the general students. Of the students who passed the higher secondary examination, about one-third of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students obtained below 50 per cent marks. About 30 per cent of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students obtained first division marks as compared to about 40 per cent for all categories of students. This means that many Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students do not have the required marks to be able to access higher education. 13 e) Another problem that Scheduled Castes students specially face is the discrimination in school. Thus, lower enrolment rates at secondary and higher secondary levels, high dropout rates at various levels in school, low attainment or achievement levels and discrimination in some spheres are some of the issues which need to be addressed under SCSP and TSP. 14 Section 4 Recommendations Related to General Guidelines for Effective Implementation of SCSP and TSP In the light of the above discussion we now make recommendations for effective implementation of SCSP and TSP. The recommendations are in three parts. These include: (a) Clarifications on the concept of SCSP and TSP (b) Recommended guidelines for implementation of SCSP and TSP (c) Recommended guidelines for the administrative set up at the level of the Ministry of Human Resource Development and various organisations/councils Clarification on the Concept and Purpose of SCSP and TSP―SCSP and TSP are both Financial and Physical Plans It is necessary to reiterate that the SCSP and TSP are not only financial plans but involve planning for the achievement of education targets in physical terms with respect to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in proportion to the population and to reduce the gap in educational development between them and the ‘rest’ as suggested by the Planning Commission Task Force. (a) The first principle of SCSP and TSP which is recommended by Narendra Jadhav Committee is that for higher education. Of the total outlay of the Ministry of Human Resource Development, 7.5 per cent for TSP and 15 per cent for SCSP must be earmarked. The percentage of school education sector under these plans is 8.25 per cent and 16.20 per cent for Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes respectively. (b) The second principle is that the earmarked outlay should necessarily be spent on the persons from Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. The outlay under SCSP and TSP is non-divertible and non-lapsable. The beneficiaries should be necessarily from Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. So in each of the educational schemes, the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes beneficiaries are identified and required funds are spent on the schemes. For this purpose, the physical target in terms of beneficiaries from Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are clearly mentioned, and the allocated funds are spent so that they receive the focus and targeted benefit from the schemes. (c) The third principle relates to the schemes. The schemes developed by the Ministry of Human Resource Development may fall into three categories. These include: 15 (i) Schemes developed specifically for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and hence the focus is on Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (ii) General schemes for all including Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes where the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes beneficiaries could be clearly identified and a specific target could be easily fixed (iii) General schemes which include Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, but Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes may not be easily identifiable in specific proportion The principle of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes beneficiaries under SCSP and TSP requires that in all the three schemes, the beneficiaries from Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes be clearly identified and the fund earmarked for them should be clearly known. In case of the schemes specially developed for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, since the focus is on the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, the number of beneficiaries and the fund should be clearly highlighted and known. Similarly, the general schemes in which the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes beneficiaries can be identified, the proportion of beneficiaries and allocated fund could be easily earmarked. Thus, in both the schemes, namely the ‘schemes which are specifically meant for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes’, and the universal schemes in which the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes beneficiaries could be easily identified, the earmarking of fund can be done in the proportion to the prescribed population ratio as recommended by Narendra Jadhav Committee. In case of the third category, where the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes beneficiaries are not easily identifiable due to the problem of non-divisibility, specific schemes should be developed in a manner such that they address their educational problems and benefit them directly, which are measurable and identifiable, with outlay in a proportion to one recommended by Narendra Jadav Committee. (d) The fourth principle relates to the specific schemes that address specific problems of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in school and higher education. We make some general suggestions regarding the issues to be addressed through focus schemes. It is necessary to recognise that the problem of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes is of dual nature. Low enrolment at higher secondary level, low academic attainment, inability to bear the cost are some of the problems which all the students face. However, there are some problems which are specific to them, such as poor knowledge in English language and in some subjects, poor social skill, lack of facilities for study at home, lack of support from family (family’s education level being low), and the problem of discrimination in educational institutions. Therefore, the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes would require ‘dual policy’ 16 schemes which are common to all, and schemes specific to them to address their specific problems. Thus, while developing schemes under SCSP and TSP the specific problems of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes should be kept in mind. (e) The last principle is that in the Ministry of Human Resource Development and in the organisations/institutions under the Ministry of Human Resource Development a separate unit to prepare the SCSP and the TSP plan and to monitor them should be set up. In light of these general principles which are suggested by the Planning Commission Task Force, we suggest the following guidelines for effective implementation of the SCSP and TSP by the Ministry of Human Resource Development. General Guidelines/Principles for both School and Higher Education Sector (1) Allocation of Outlay: Minimum 16.2 per cent and 10.70 per cent of the Plan allocations under school sector may be earmarked for SCSP and TSP respectively. For higher education sector, a minimum of 15 per cent and 7.5 per cent may be earmarked for SCSP and TSP respectively. However, in order to utilise this allocated amount in full, judicious earmarking may be done among the schemes. (2) Beneficiary focus: As per the directives of the Planning Commission, only those schemes/components of programmes should be included under SCSP and TSP which ensure direct benefits to individuals or families belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Therefore, only those schemes/components or programmes (and outlays) would qualify to be included under SCSP and TSP which can ensure direct benefit to individuals or families belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and have the potential to bridge the gaps in educational development of these categories and to promote equity among them. Funds under the schemes having no bearing on educational development of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes should not be earmarked under SCSP and TSP. The Ministry of Human Resource Development while indicating the allocation of SCSP and TSP fund to the SCSP and TSP schemes shall follow the following norms, namely: a. For schemes exclusively benefitting Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes individuals or Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes households, 100 per cent of the scheme cost shall be allocated and accounted for under the SCSP and TSP fund. b. For other schemes included in Sub Plans, benefitting Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes individuals or Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes households along with others, the scheme cost shall be allocated and accounted for under SCSP and TSP in proportion to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes beneficiaries cover. 17 c. For schemes benefitting Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes habitations, where population of Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes or combined population of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes is not less than 40 per cent of the total population of habitation, 100 per cent scheme cost shall be allocated and accounted for under SCSP and TSP fund, provided a minimum of 70 per cent of the beneficiaries are either from Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes or combined category. For the educational institutions located outside these habitations but have minimum 50 per cent beneficiaries either from Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes or combined categories also qualify for SCSP and TSP subject to the condition that cost is accounted in the proportion of beneficiaries plus 20 per cent additional under SCSP and TSP. In case of other habitations/educational institutions, cost shall be allocated and accounted for under the SCSP and TSP in proportion to the beneficiaries of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. d. In respect of non-divisible infrastructure works, a proportion of a scheme cost as may be determine by the Government shall be deemed to have been attributed for SCSP and TSP respectively. However, the organisation should try to make the nondivisible infrastructure divisible, to the extent possible, through the module suggested in the following paragraphs. e. North-East: Earmarking of the funds for SCSP and TSP will also be applicable on funds earmarked for the North-East region. However, flexibility in earmarking of the SCSP and TSP funds between the North-East region and the rest of India funds may be allocated in proportion of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes beneficiaries under a particular scheme/programme. Few Suggested Modules to Ensure Full Utilisation Outlay under SCSP and TSP The Task Force set up to review guidelines on SCSP and TSP by the Planning Commission has made the outlay under SCSP and TSP non-lapsable and non-divertible. In situations where the fund under the SCSP and TSP still remained underutilised, the Committee recommends two solutions. They are: (a) First, through scaling up in the number of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes beneficiaries and outlay through supernumerary methods to cover a higher number of eligible persons/beneficiaries (beyond 16 per cent and eight per cent for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes respectively). Spheres where scaling up may be considered: The schemes where the potential demand by Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students is higher than their share in population, and where many potential Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe beneficiaries may get excluded due to the limit of population ratio, which may lead to their under-representation and the enlargement of social gap between them and others. In such cases the scheme should be scaled up for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes over and above the population ratio to meet the additional demand. In other words, for any such schemes aimed at benefiting more than the 18 respective proportion (percentage) of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes population, additional number of beneficiaries should be covered. (b) Secondly, by developing new schemes to address the issues specific to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Spheres where new schemes or component of schemes could be introduced: In case of projects/schemes which are of a general nature and the expenditure is nondivisible on Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, new schemes to meet the need of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students should be developed to bridge the gap between them and others. The new Scheduled Castesand Scheduled Tribes-focused schemes/models should include construction of more girls' and boys' hostel for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in small towns, districts, metropolitan cities, hostel and financial support/fellowship for female students, for students from rural areas, from wage labour households; remedial coaching in English and some core subjects such as science and mathematics, self-enrichment programmes, communication skills, coaching for admission to professional courses (medicine, engineering, management and similar courses), supply of expensive books (e-books, e-journals) and instruments in professional courses such as medicine, engineering and similar courses; freeship and scholarship, fellowship/scholarship for overseas education, tuition fee waiver, pocket allowance, and positive steps to develop nondiscriminatory atmospheres in higher education institutions/schools, send money for research to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes faculty. Thus, the outlays on directly (Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) focused schemes, devisable schemes, scaling up by expanding the schemes to cover more beneficiaries and creating new schemes should be used as methods to make use of the entire outlay under SCSP and TSP. However, schemes/new modules suggested in the above paragraphs should be consistent with the Annual and Five Year plans and priorities of the Ministry of Human Resource Development as may be communicated by the Planning Commission. Administrative Set Up for Implementation of SCSP and TSP in Centrally Funded Educational Institution, Regulators and Other Councils under Administrative Control of the Ministry of Human Resource Development The Planning Commission Task Force has made some specific recommendations with respect to administrative set up, formulation and monitoring of SCSP and TSP in organisations under administrative control of the Ministry of Human Resource Development. In order to implement the SCSP and TSP in the Ministry of Human Resource Development, the following institutional arrangements are suggested. 19 (a) The Existing National Monitoring Committee for Educational Development of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and persons with disabilities under the Chairmanship of the Honourable Minister of Human Resource Development will also oversee the implementation of SCSP and TSP and this committee will be assisted by its Standing Committee. These committees will be serviced by Bureaus of Economics in the Department of School and Literacy and the Department of Higher Education in the Ministry of Human Resource Development. All organisations under the administrative control of the Ministry of Human Resource Development will designate a Nodal Unit or a Committee or Project Approval Board (PAB) in case of Centrally Sponsored Schemes to oversee the implementation of SCSP and TSP in their respective organisations/ programmes. These Units/Committees/PABs, after estimating the gap in the educational development of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and prioritising the development needs of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes through a consultative process, shall prepare SCSP and TSP in respect of their organisations/schemes with the approval of the Competent Authority. The Concerned Bureau in the Ministry of Human Resource Development will consolidate the SCSP and TSP bureau-wise and place the same in a prescribed format before the National Monitoring Committee for approval within the timeframe, as per the budget process. (b) The National Monitoring Committee with the help of the respective Bureau/Nodal Units shall evaluate and appraise the SCSP and TSP proposed by the Ministry and its Organisations for ensuring conformity to the provisions of the guidelines, and the schemes that fulfil norms as laid down in the guidelines shall be recommended for inclusion in the Annual Plan proposals of the Ministry of Human Resource Development. (i) recommend re-allocation of budget allotted to various programmes/ organisations which are not in a position to incur expenditure, to other needy programmes/organisations or as may be necessary to ensure expenditure of funds allocated under SCSP and TSP. Review and monitor the allocations, expenditure and implementation of SCSP and TSP. Identify impediments and suggest measures for overcoming them to ensure that all schemes and organisations spend the fund earmarked for SCSP and TSP. (ii) facilitate an at least annual social auditing of expenditure of SCSP and TSP and facilitate the analysis of improvement in educational development indicators against projections of Annual and Five Year Plans. Any other functions as may be assigned by the Ministry of Human Resource Development. 20 (c) The directions of the committee in the implementation of its functions shall be binding on the Ministry. The Committee shall meet at least twice in a year or as frequently as necessary. (d) The Ministry of Human Resource Development shall establish a Sub Plan Research Centre at Indian Council of Social Science Research to carry out studies and gap analysis for identifying priorities of investment under the SCSP and TSP. The centre may cause the maintenance of state-wise, scheme-wise and beneficiary-wise details and through the Nodal Units of the organisations/bureaus by setting up a web portal for tracking the progress of the implementation, expenditure, output and outcome indicators as may be prescribed in SCSP and TSP. (f) It is necessary to mention that most of the programmes/schemes have been approved by the Cabinet under the Eleventh Five Year Plan while the SCSP and TSP has been initiated at the terminal year of the Eleventh Five Year Plan. Therefore, approved schemes/programmes may not permit the flexibility that would be necessary for implementation of the SCSP and TSP with new guidelines in some cases, if not all. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Human Resource Development should seek the general approval of a competent authority for providing the flexibility. Similarly, University Grants Commission should seek the approval of the Commission and centrally funded institutions/councils should seek the approval of their competent authorities. Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes Education Management Information System (SEMIS): A dedicated Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes education website, hosted in the government servers, may be developed. It may have two components: (i) Disseminates information about the various education schemes and programmes of the Ministry of Human Resource Development and all states'/Union Territories' education departments that are earmarking funds under SCSP and TSP each year. (ii) Tracks Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students from school education through to higher education, including their access to educational needs such as scholarships, uniforms, textbooks, etc. The website may be developed in English and in all the official state/Union Territory languages. All data on schemes and earmarking under SCSP and TSP each year will be available at both the Ministry of Human Resource Development and state/Union Territory levels. An Annual Action Plan may be prepared in such a way that for each scheme/programme, outlays and beneficiaries under the SCSP and TSP are shown distinctly. 21 Section 5 Recommendations Related to General Guidelines for Implementation of SCSP and TSP in Higher Education Sector The guidelines for higher education sector are given for the following segment. Schemes Funded Directly by the Ministry of Human Resource Development a) Central schemes: Schemes include 82,000 scholarships for college and university students doing undergraduate and post graduate, a special scheme of 5000 scholarships for Jammu and Kashmir students who get admission outside Jammu and Kashmir for undergraduate and post graduate degree in India, ICT Mission which involved providing connectivity to colleges/university, content development, training of teachers, interest subsidy and programmes related to development of language. b) Centrally sponsored schemes: 374 model colleges, submission polytechnic, TEQUIP (under which selected technical institutes are supported by The World Bank for upgradation) and support to 50 polytechnic for integration of persons with disability. c) Centrally funded educational institutions: IIT, IIM, NIT, IIIT, ISERS, IGNOU and other stand-alone institutions like NERIST, CIL, Chadhuary Charan Singh Institute, NITI, Mumbai, and similar institutions; central universities covered under University Grants Commission, Hindi Directorate, Sanskrit Sansthan, CIL Mysore, and similar centrally-funded educational institutions. Regulatory Bodies under Human Resource Development Funded Institutions 1) University Grant Commission, All India Council of Technical Education, Distance Education Council, (managed by IGNOU), NCTE 2) Research Councils: Indian Council of Social Science Research, Indian Council of Historical Research, Indian Council of Philosophical Research, National Council of Rural Institute, Institute of Advanced Studies 22 We proposed the following guidelines separately for each of the constituents for implementation of SCSP and TSP Central Sector Schemes―Directly managed by the Ministry of Human Resource Development Under the central sector schemes (CSS) are the schemes which are directly funded and managed by the Ministry of Human Resource Development. (1) These scholarship schemes are perfectly devisable as Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes beneficiaries can be identified and a specific proportion of scholarship should be earmarked for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students including the scholarship for Jammu and Kashmir state. In case of scholarships, many students from Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes may be excluded due to limited number of scholarships, and therefore additional provisions over and above 16 per cent for Scheduled Castes and eight per cent or Scheduled Tribes could be made. (2) In ICT preference may be given to colleges which serve the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students. (3) In case of interest subsidy schemes, additional relaxation could be given to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students, which could be financed from SCSP and TSP. At present, the coverage of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes being limited, the income limit of Rs 4.5 lakhs be waived in case of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students. (4) The Ministry of Human Resource Development (through University Grants Commission) has issued regulation preventing discrimination in higher education institutions, such as central and state universities, IIT, IIM, NIT and other institutions. The Ministry of Human Resource Development may develop schemes for promoting positive non-discriminatory best practices and other measures for implementation through Equal Opportunity Office. (5) The Committee also proposes additional schemes to be directly managed by the Ministry of Human Resource Development (a) Overseas Scholarships: The overseas scholarship scheme for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes candidates should be introduced by the Ministry of Human Resource Development on the lines of schemes run by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment and Maharashtra government to the level commensurate with the total number of Indian students getting education abroad. There shall be no condition of annual family income ceiling for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students proceeding on overseas studies under this scheme. The amount provided under the overseas scholarship scheme should be revised to cover the entire cost including all fees and other mandatory payments, all maintenance expense and travel costs. 23 While reaching 500 scholarships the number should be increased subsequently to make the number of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students going for overseas studies commensurate with the total number of Indian students getting education abroad. (b) Women's Hostels, Libraries―Increase in Number and Facilities: The number of hostels for women’s colleges and universities should be increased. These hostels should be provided with library and computer facilities. Each district should have independent women’s hostels for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. There is a need to scale up the existing schemes focusing on Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes women. (c) Hostels in Metros: Special hostel complexes need to be built using SCSP and TSP funds in all metro and major cities for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and students from other marginalised groups who want to benefit from the educational services located in cities for facilities such as professional coaching, research degrees, etc. Fifty per cent of such hostel capacities must be reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes women. Centrally Sponsored Schemes The centrally sponsored schemes mainly include 374 model colleges and grants for polytechnics. In case of both the schemes the Ministry of Human Resource Development provides grants to the state to set up model colleges and polytechnics. The model colleges and the polytechnic should be required to develop schemes for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students, particularly freeship, remedial coaching and hostel facilities. The present institutions operated and set up by Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe persons should receive priority to set up polytechnics. Centrally funded educational institutions The centrally funded educational institutions receive direct funding from the Ministry of Human Resource Development and these include IITs, IIMs, NITs, IGNOU and similar institutes. Since these institutes receive direct grant―plan and non-plan grants―from the Ministry of Human Resource Development, these institutions should implement SCSP and TSP as per the Ministry of Human Resource Development guidelines. The Ministry of Human Resource Development should use the following guidelines: (i) First, the Ministry of Human Resource Development should clearly indicate the plan and non-plan financial allocation under the SCSP and TSP to these institutions in their annual allocation. (ii) Secondly, the Ministry of Human Resource Development should send a clear directive to these institutions that the allocation under SCSP and TSP should necessarily spend on the schemes relating to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 24 Tribes students and in some cases Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes teachers and non-teaching staff fully and should not divert or underutilise the outlay under SCSP and TSP in any case. The institutes should develop plans in consultation with Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes teachers and students. The Action plan should be sent to the Ministry of Human Resource Development at the beginning of the year. (iii) The proportion of student beneficiaries and the fund should necessarily be according to the proportion of Schedules Caste and Schedules Tribe students among the total students in the Institute. Efforts should be made so that the ratio of Schedules Castes and Scheduled Tribes beneficiaries and the outlay remain around 16 per cent and eight per cent respectively. (iv) On the pattern of University Grants Commission, these institutions should set up an Equal Opportunity Office (EOO) and all programmes and schemes related to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (and even related to women, the physically handicapped and other groups) should be implemented through this office. The expenses on EOO should be incurred from SCSP and TSP. Schemes to be included under SCSP and TSP While the schemes, and the financial and other support to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students should be decided by the institution in consultation with the students and teachers, we would like to make some suggestions which may be kept in mind while framing the schemes.. The general problems faced by the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students include: Lower enrolment in IITs, IIMs, NITs and other professional institutions A relatively poor base in the some subjects and, in some cases, in the English language Poor social and communication skills Low marks in examinations More attempts in passing the examinations Frequent failure compared to others Relatively high dropout rates Poor financial background Experience of discrimination and differential treatment So we suggest that the schemes which will address these problems should be developed using the funds from the SCSP and TSP. The schemes should include: 25 1) Schemes to coach students to prepare for admission test under GATE and CAT to IIT, IIM, NIT and other professional institutions, so that the percentage of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students in these institutions improves to the required ratio of 16 per cent and eight per cent for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes respectively. 2) Strong personalised remedial support for improving fluency in English, knowledge related to the subject, and improvement in basic subjects. The remedial coaching classes should be conducted for the group of students who need collective support, but also on individual basis by concerned teachers through Equal Opportunity Office. 3) Remedial coaching for improvement of social skill and communication 4) The remedial coaching in English language, in some subjects where the students need support in personalised manner, and support in developing social skills and confidence building will improve their academic performance, reduce failure rate, dropout rate and improve success rate. 5) Hostel facilities with tuition and other fee waiver, supply of books, equipment, and computers through funds from SCSP and TSP should help them to improve their performance. 6) Implementation of the regulation against discrimination, and positive steps against social coercion and for confidence building should be another component of the scheme. 7) The teachers belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes community need to be empowered by providing them grants to do research, attend conferences, get additional capacity development and training in pedagogy and subject matter. 8) Similar facilities for capacity enhancement should be developed for non-teaching staff belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. 9) The funds for all these schemes should come from the SCSP and TSP. 10) We are giving a sample of some schemes developed by IIT Delhi. While these efforts must be appreciated, some improvement is necessary. (Also see the Annexure) At present, IIT Delhi is implementing the following beneficiary schemes for promoting the education of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and persons with disabilities. The situation in other IITs is likely to be very similar: Undergraduate Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe/Physically Handicapped students i. All students irrespective of their parental income get complete tuition fee waiver. ii. All students with parental income less than Rs 4.5 lakhs per annum and staying in the hostel get free messing and a pocket allowance of Rs. 250 per month. 26 iii. Normally all students get hostel accommodation unless they are staying within 12 km of the campus. In case of students eligible for free messing (Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students with parental income less than Rs 4.5 lakhs per annum) and living close to the campus, hostel accommodation is to be provided with free messing if they apply for the same. Post Graduate Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes/Physically Handicap students i. Full-time students are admitted only through GATE and all admitted students get assistantship. MTech/MS(R) students get assistantship of Rs. 8,000 per month and PhD students get between Rs 16,000 and Rs 20,000 depending on their previous degree. As they get full assistantship they are required to pay their mess bill (approximately Rs 2,000 per month). They are still exempted from paying their tuition fee (Rs 5,000 per semester). We are not aware whether the fund for these schemes comes from the SCSP and TSP or not. However, there is need to develop schemes which we have been mentioned earlier. In addition to the above, the followings proposals can give the targeted benefits to students belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes categories. (a) Laptop shall be provided to all Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students subject to a limit of Rs. 40,000 on the basis of their need with the expenditure ratio of 90 per cent from the SCSP grant and 10 per cent by the candidate (to ensure genuine requirement). In addition, Internet access facility using data cards can be extended to all such students subject to a limit of Rs. 300 per student per month during the course of studies. (b) The allowance of undergraduate students can be increased to Rs 1,500 per month if their parental income is less than Rs 7.5 lakhs per annum. (c) The post graduate assistantship continuation requires a certain minimum academic performance. Every semester, a few students (less than 10) lose their assistantship because of not being able to meet the academic requirement. Some of them are from Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes categories. A living allowance of Rs 4,000 per month that would cover their mess plus other expenses can be given to students whose parental income is less than Rs.7.5 lakhs per annum even when they have not met the academic requirement, but are continuing in the course. (d) IIT Delhi has been conducting a self-enrichment programme with the help of CREST for the last three years. The results have been positive. Therefore, similar initiatives/suitable schemes may be drawn by all centrally funded educational institutions. 27 (e) Hundred per cent fee waiver for all courses including self-financed courses in all centrally funded educational institutions. (f) Extension of grant of scholarship to all post graduate Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students subject to a minimum condition that it not exceed a period of two years and the students obtain the minimum of pass grade throughout their period of studies. (g) In some states/regions where there is a lack of candidates either in Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe categories, provisions should be made to exchange/transfer seats/vacant positions between the two categories after the normal process of admissions is over. (h) Adequate provision should be considered for extra training programmes for imparting proficiency in communication skills, general awareness, leadership and also preparing for GATE, CAT and on-campus placements. (i) Seed money/research grant to each or all Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe faculty who submit an appropriate proposal once in every five years, subject to a limit of Rs. 5 lakhs in a block period of five years. Such grant should limit 80 per cent of the expenditure towards establishment of facilities and 20 per cent towards recurring expenditure of the work. The institutes can be allowed to make its own policy for such schemes. (j) Special focus needs to be given to women who belong to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes communities in higher education and the implementation strategy must focus on covering all women. (k) All institutes should set up a committee to prepare, implement and monitor the SCSP and TSP and the scheme under it. Autonomous/Subordinate Organisations The general principles prescribed above should invariably be applicable to these institutes: 28 University Grants Commission As mentioned above, University Grants Commission is one of the largest councils that funds and regulates a main segment of higher education institutions. These include universities and colleges all over the country. It provides development grants and also supports various schemes. The University Grants Commission’s funding can be divided under a few heads. (a) Full funding―plan and non-plan grants―to central universities, including a few government deemed universities (b) Development grants to state universities (c) Grants to central and state universities and colleges under various schemes (d) Financial support under various schemes to the faculty and students (e) Most importantly, the University Grants Commission operates several schemes on its own for faculty and students. At present it seems that the University Grants Commission has some schemes which are directly focused on Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. However, very few general schemes have SCSP and TSP components in them. Besides, it does not have administrative arrangement to prepare, implement and monitor SCSP and TSP. The application forms for various schemes does not include the social background of the applicants, hence the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe beneficiaries cannot be identified. It is reported that the amount under SCSP is high, which requires planning for the preparation of schemes for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and a component in the general scheme which at present seems missing. The Committee makes the following recommendations for the implementation of SCSP and TSP from the current year 2013–14 for University Grants Commission: Administrative set up to prepare, implement and monitor SCSP and TSP Plans, The Committee recommends that the present Standing Committee for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the University Grants Commission with the assistance from relevant Bureau should prepare an annual plan and implement and monitor the SCSP and TSP. The following guidelines should be used to prepare SCSP and TSP: The schemes directly operated by University Grants Commission Schemes directly focused on Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes―There are some schemes which are developed for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students and teachers. These schemes should be used to make use of the SCSP and TSP funds to the extent possible. These schemes include: 1. Equal Opportunity Cell in universities. 29 2. Remedial coaching scheme for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes/Other Backward Classes (non-creamy layer) and minorities. 3. Coaching classes for NET/SET for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes/Other Backward Classes (non-creamy layer) and Minorities. 4. Coaching classes for entry into service for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes/Other Backward Classes (non-creamy layer) and minorities. 5. Special development grants to colleges with relatively higher population of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes/ Minorities. 6. Post Doctoral Fellowship for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes candidates. 7. Post Graduate Scholarship for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students in professional courses. 8. Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes cell. The expenditure on the schemes directly focused on Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes will be necessarily counted under SCSP and TSP. a) Scheme directly managed by UGC―These are the schemes which are devisable and Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes beneficiary can be identified and funds under SCSP and TSP can be booked. There are number of schemes which are operated by University Grants Commission and most of these schemes are for faculty and students. In these general schemes, 16 per cent and eight per cent of beneficiaries should be from the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes respectively. These will require changes in the application forms where the column for social background of students and teachers will have to be introduced. These include the following schemes. 1) For Faculty―Professor Emeritus schemes for in-service teachers to do a PhD, travel grant for international seminars/conferences, schemes for exchange of faculty under international collaboration 2) For students―Post Doctoral fellowship in science and social sciences, PhD fellowship under NET, non-NET PhD fellowship in sciences, non-NET PhD fellowship in central universities 3) Conferences and seminars 4) Major and minor research projects Since these 13 to 14 schemes are for individual teachers, the 16 per cent for Scheduled Castes and eight per cent for Scheduled Tribes can be easily 30 earmarked and the expenditure on them could be booked under SCSP and TSP. At present there is no such provision. Central Universities and State Deemed Universities Forty-one central universities and some central institutions and state deemed universities received hundred per cent funding from University Grants Commission. The University Grants Commission should indicate the financial allocation under SCSP and TSP to central universities. In turn, the central universities should develop the schemes for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students, and Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe faculty. The schemes should be developed in consultation with the students and teachers. This would be operated by the Equal Opportunity Office. The schemes would include remedial coaching, scholarship and fellowship for graduate, post graduate and PhD students, hostels through capital grants under SCSP and TSP and other schemes. The Action Plan under SCSP and TSP should be submitted to the Ministry of Human Resource Development and University Grants Commission at the beginning of the year. State universities and colleges The University Grants Commission gives development grants to state universities and colleges. The University Grants Commission should clearly indicate funds under SCSP and TSP. The University Grants Commission should suggest to the state universities and colleges to develop schemes for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students. In case of all University Grants Commission’s own merge schemes for central universities, state universities and colleges, the University Grants Commission should have clear allocation under SCSP and TSP. The allocation under SCSP and TSP should be indicated to the central and state universities and colleges in their allocation letter. The grants to central and state universities and colleges are mostly development grants. Therefore, the appropriate portion of that grant should be used to construct hostels for boys and girls where the students from Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes should have adequate share. Many of the central and state universities and colleges run self-finance courses for which the funds under SCSP and TSP should be used for subsidising the tuition and other fees of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students. 31 All India Council of Technical Education The Ministry of Human Resource Development in its yearly plan and non-plan should clearly mention the allocation under SCSP and TSP. The All India Council of Technical Education (AICTE) should prepare the schemes under the SCSP and TSP. The ongoing scheme/ programmes of the AICTE have very limited scope for the earmarking of funds under SCSP and TSP. Therefore, there is a need to draw special schemes for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes which may include a component for the direct flow of benefits to these categories and area-oriented programmes. The AICTE should submit the Action Plan under SCSP and TSP to the Ministry of Human Resource Development. Distance Education The Ministry of Human Resource Development in its yearly plan allocation should mention the allocation under SCSP and TSP. (i) All Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students, registered/proposed to register should be exempted from fee, including material costs. (ii) More study/examination centres may be opened in Scheduled Casteand Scheduled Tribe-dominated areas to increase their access to distance education. Research Councils There are three main research councils under the Ministry of Human Resource Development, namely Indian Council of Social Science Research, Indian Council of Historical Research, and Indian Council of Philosophical Research. There are other councils also. The Ministry of Human Resource Development in its annual allocation has begun to mention allocation under SCSP and TSP since last year, both under capital and revenue expenditures and for plan and non-plan. Almost all the schemes of these councils are for individuals, namely the teachers/researchers/students from the universities and research institutes. Therefore, it is easy to earmark 16 per cent and eight per cent position for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and book expenditure on SCSP and TSP. It is recommended that the council should: 32 (a) make a specific earmarking of 16 per cent and eight per cent for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in all their schemes for teachers, researchers and students. (b) bring modification in forms by introducing the column on the caste and tribe background so that Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe applications could be identified. (c) introduce new schemes (d) inform of this policy through the website and other media These councils should submit the annual Action Plan in the beginning of the year to the Ministry of Human Resource Development. Higher Education Student MIS and Database: A database of all Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students needs to be prepared with a collaborative initiative of the Information Communication Technology and the equal opportunity centre so that benefit flow can be tracked and monitored. Publicity of the Guidelines: Wide publicity through electronic/print media may be done. Workshops/seminars for creating awareness about these guidelines among various central institutions/state governments and other planning/implementing agencies may also be organised. Monitoring of implementation of SCSP and TSP: The National Monitoring Committee for Educational Development of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and the physically handicapped will have the responsibility for monitoring the progress for implementation of SCSP and TSP. The National Monitoring Committee will be assisted by the Standing Committee for the purpose. 33 Section 6 Recommendations Related to General Guidelines for Implementation of SCSP and TSP in School Education Sector After having suggested general guidelines and principles which are applicable to schools and higher education institutions, we now make recommendations for the School sector and then move on to higher education. The following suggestions are made for the implementation of SCSP and TSP in the school sector under the Ministry of Human Resource Development. While making recommendations, the twin principles of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe beneficiaries and the earmarked funds on them have been kept in view so that at the end we are able to benefit a minimum of 16 per cent and eight per cent for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes beneficiaries and funds in the same proportion are accounted for under the SCSP and TSP. The guidelines also make a number of suggestions which could be converted into schemes for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes under SCSP and TSP. General Recommendations 1. Special instructions may be given at state and district levels for the formulation of schemes and budget allocations under SCSP and TSP which would clarify and aid state/Union Territory governments in their formulation of Annual Work Plan and Budget for school education schemes. 2. Centrally sponsored schemes may introduce new columns into all relevant formats within the Annual Work Plan and Budget to enable states/Union Territories to provide disaggregated data on the status/needs of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children, including gender-wise breakup of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe categories. This would enable states/Union Territories to provide clear physical and financial targets which benefit the maximum number of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students. 3. The educationally backward blocks have been identified on the basis of high Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes population or on the basis of more than the national average gender literacy as well as higher than national gender literacy gap. It is suggested that within the educationally backward block, the status of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe girls based on their literacy rate should identified. It will aid states/Union Territories officials in targeting their schemes to Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe girls in specific blocks where their literacy levels are below the 34 national average under the SCSP and TSP. These blocks would then be the basis for allocations under SCSP and TSP, where block-wise criteria will be applied to the schemes. 4. Currently, pre-school education programmes lie with the Ministry of Women and Child Development, while school education lies with the Department of School Education and Literacy, Ministry of Human Resource Development. Bringing both pre-school and school programmes together under the Ministry of Human Resource Development shall benefit from strong linkages in the education system from preschooling through to schooling and higher education. In particular, anganwadis/balwadis created in every Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe habitation will enhance government efforts towards ensuring the enrolment and access to pre-school education of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children, as the first step towards promoting their enrolment in primary schools. In addition, separating early childhood care and education from one year of pre-schooling and placing the pre-school with the primary education under the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act will enhance access to education for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe girls in particular. Guidelines for Specific Schemes 1. Jawahar NavodayaVidyalaya 1. In case of the currently functioning Jawahar Novodaya Vidyalayas (JNVs), funds under SCSP and TSP may be earmarked scheme-wise in proportion to the number of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students admitted into JNVs. 2. JNVs may be extended to cover all Scheduled Casteand Scheduled Tribepopulated Special Focus Districts drawing on funds from the SCSP and TSP in proportion to the number of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students admitted. 3. A one-year preparatory course may be started within JNVs for children to prepare for the college entrance exams. This would be a residential course available for all students in schools which have over 20 per cent to 40 per cent Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students. The outlay on this would be earmarked under SCSP and TSP. 4. Similar to what has been mandated under the RTE Act, JNVs may have a guideline that their Parents Teachers Association (PTAs) be composed of 50 per cent women, and proportionate representation of parents from Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes background. 35 2. Vocational Education 1 Presently, very less funds are earmarked for vocational education under the SCSP and TSP, despite the fact that large number of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes youths get dropped out at various stages, before and after matriculation and higher secondary, and try to move into the job market without much of the required skills and vocation due to financial constraints. However, some of them particularly join private vocational institutes which offer new skills that help in gainful employment. The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes should be provided with career guidance and financial support in terms of freeship and scholarship for doing vocational courses through SCSP and TSP. 2 This step should lead to the foundation courses for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe youths in market demand-oriented skill development. 3 Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe youths admitted into vocational education institutions may receive a waiver on course fees and all compulsory course-related costs, and the fees collected by the institution through the SCSP and TSP. 3. Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan 1 Area-based eligibility for SCSP and TSP funds earmarking may be based on Special Focus Districts, i.e. districts which have 25 per cent or more Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe population. Priority shall also be given to locating such schools in/near to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes habitations. 2 One set of notebooks may be provided to all Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes children in primary and upper primary schools with a ceiling of Rs. 150 per child at primary level and Rs. 250 per child at upper primary level spent on purchase of such notebooks. 3 Residential Schools and Hostels for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes: Starting with districts which have 25 per cent and above Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes population, residential schools and hostels for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes should be established. Construction of such schools and hostels, being creation of capital assets, may be booked under the SCSP and TSP. Admissions to these residential schools and hostels will have 80 per cent reservation for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children. A fee waiver may apply for all schooling/boarding fees for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children, and the schooling/boarding fees may be reimbursed to the residential schools/hostels through the SCSP and TSP. 4 Urban Residential Schools and Seasonal Hostels for Migrant Children: Residential schools and hostels may be specifically established through SCSP and 36 TSP to enable the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children to seek admission at high school and higher secondary level. 5 Residential schools and hostels may be specifically established to enable the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children of migrant parents in urban areas. As recommended by the Working Group on Elementary Education and Literacy for the Twelfth Five Year Plan, these hostels can range from a three to eight month period of stay for learners, and be established in the vicinity of elementary schools to ensure the admission of such learners. Once states have identified the number of migrant children in a given urban area, funds for the creation of residential schools or temporary hostels shall be earmarked from the SCSP and TSP, and the boarding/education of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe migrant children should be taken from the SCSP and TSP in proportion to the number of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe beneficiaries. 6 A directive may be issued from the Department of School Education and Literacy, Ministry of Human Resource Development regarding the section on bridging gender and social gaps in the state/Union Territories Annual Work Plan and Budget in which the government shall indicate that separate information on Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes be given in every Annual Work Plan and Budget so as to facilitate states/Union Territories to earmark funds under SCSP and TSP, and the creation of a basket of schemes to directly benefit Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students. Innovative Schemes and Programmes to End Discrimination in Education 1 The campaign on RTE may specifically include materials and messages against discrimination. 2 A comprehensive manual for addressing discrimination may be commissioned in 2012-13. 3 An Act similar to the University Grants Commission (Prevention of Caste-based Discrimination/Harassment/Victimisation and Promotion of Equality in Higher Educational Institutions) Regulation 2011, dated 27 April 2012, shall be drafted and legislated by all states to address discriminatory practices related to caste and similar identities. 4 Schools may be encouraged to develop and enforce norms of behaviour that specifically mandate non-discrimination, elimination of corporal punishment and prohibition of other harassment and physical or mental abuse of children. 5 An anti-discrimination helpline may be established at the block level as one grievance redressal mechanism to address discrimination, harassment, abuse and corporal punishment of all types occurring in any schools, government aided, 37 private or special category. This helpline shall fall under the jurisdiction of the Block Resource Centres linked to concrete redressal mechanisms. The Block Resource Centres may link with local NGOs to receive support in monitoring discriminatory practices in schools and/or managing the helpline. 6 A set of programmes to promote inclusion and caste-/ethnicity-/gender-based harmony in schools should be designed and commissioned. Such programmes may include the following: (a) Providing reading/learning spaces within schools for children in Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe populated blocks. (b) Funds proportionate to the number of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children shall be allotted for enhancing the knowledge of English language among all Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children in schools. Additional teachers, ICT materials and print materials could be provided for this purpose. (c) Funds proportionate to the number of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children in schools shall be allotted under SCSP and TSP to encourage Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children to excel in sports, music and art, and to facilitate their participation in district, state and national competitions. (d) Funds proportionate to Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children in schools shall be allotted under SCSP and TSP for payment of counsellors to give additional career counselling and guidance for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children in classes 9 and 10 about the various options for intermediate and higher education, about the available colleges and seats, about scholarships and other provisions available to Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students. (e) Education stipends shall be provided to Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children of below-poverty-line single parents. These could be stipends of Rs 500 per month (Rs 6,000 per year) which are extended to two children of single-parent below-poverty-line families from Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe communities. The condition should be that these children continue with their school education. 7 Per Block Resource Centre should have at least one Scheduled Caste teacher and one Scheduled Tribe teacher appointed as resource support to specifically look into issues of discrimination occurring against Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students and teachers in their blocks, as well as focusing on inclusive educational activities to promote harmony and interaction among social groups in the schools. This would amount to around 12,000 Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes teachers being appointed to the 6000+ blocks in the country, all of which could be booked under SCSP and TSP. 8 Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe Teachers: There may be a separate drive launched to recruit and train Scheduled Tribe teachers from the local areas who know the local Scheduled Tribe languages, for all schools in Scheduled Tribepopulated blocks. 38 Mentoring 1 A mentoring system for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students may be formally introduced, wherein the educated Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe youth from the local community will provide additional coaching and educational support to Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children. Priority shall be given to female mentors. These mentors may ensure enrolment, attendance, retention, learning support and completion of school education for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children. These services will be offered on a voluntary basis. 2 There may be an independent and registered society established at the state level with district and block/mandal level resource centres to coordinate and support the mentors. While the mentors become the arm of the programme into every panchayat, the state, district and block resource groups support and equip them to provide academic support to children in the community level. A national body may be set up within the Ministry of Human Resource Development, supported by a National Resource Group. Wherever feasible, members from among the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes with the necessary competence will have preference for recruitment in any position in the structure. 3 The operational structure and processes may draw upon the experience of the Mahila Samakya (MS) which is fully funded by the Ministry of Human Resource Development and has significantly contributed to improving girl children’s education, gender parity and girls’ empowerment. SMC members from Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Communities in Elementary schooling 1 There shall be orientation trainings given to all Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes members of SMCs on their roles in the SMCs and the RTE Act equity and inclusion provisions applicable to Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children. These trainings shall support SMC members to monitor and evolve mechanisms to ensure that Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children access, attend, participate and develop in and through schooling. For these, a specific training module should be developed regarding the RTE Act equity and inclusion provisions. A small committee at the national level should be set up to develop this module which will then be translated into all the official state languages. 2 Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes SMC members may form blockand district-level committees, which will facilitate peer learning and support to address issues of discrimination and other problems occurring in schools and affecting Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students. These block and district committees will engage effectively at school and block/district levels in terms of school 39 planning and monitoring, and hold quarterly meetings to discuss emerging issues. These committees will be supported in their functioning by the District and State Resource Group for SSA, as well as local NGOs working with Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes communities. 3 School Management Committees may have a compulsory planning section on the specific issues of discrimination faced by Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students, the numbers of dropouts and the out-of-school among Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe school children in the neighbourhood of the school, and their educational needs. 4 A sub-categorisation of the 25 per cent reservation in private schools needs to be inserted in terms of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, EWS and other disadvantaged, also ensuring 50:50 reservation for girls and boys within each subquota. 5 Language textbooks for classes 1 and 2 for Scheduled Tribes in their respective languages, with bridging textbooks to enable them to transition to learning in the state language. Scheduled Casteand Scheduled Tribe-sensitive curriculum may be commissioned this year for making additional textbooks and pre-tested this year. 6 The guidelines may have a separate section on specific interventions targeted towards Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes including compulsory microplanning for interventions for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students; a recruitment drive for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe teachers; Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe education mentors; setting up residential schools in Scheduled Casteand Scheduled Tribe-populated Special Focus Districts and then Scheduled Casteand Scheduled Tribe-populated blocks; free hostel facilities for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students; scholarships for all Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students, etc. Only funding for these specific interventions should be earmarked under the SCSP and TSP. 7 Priority may be given to re-organising Ashram schools into residential school complexes for classes 1 to 12 in a phased manner, including one year of nonresidential pre-primary schooling. 8 Preference to areas with high population of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes or low literacy levels for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe girls for opening of schools: New secondary schools in Scheduled Casteand Scheduled Tribe-populated Special Focus Districts may be opened, as well as blocks with lower than national average literacy rates for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe girls should be prioritised. Admission in such schools shall be for 80 per cent Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes children, on the basis of 50:50 girls and boys. 9 Fee waivers may be put in place for all Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students in secondary and higher secondary schools to make education free for these 40 children. The fees should be paid to each school by the state government and accounted for under SCSP and TSP. 10 Residential secondary schools may be established in Scheduled Casteand Scheduled Tribe-populated Special Focus Districts as well as blocks with lower than national average Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes literacy rates, with 80 per cent admission reserved for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students. Some schemes that could be earmarked under SCSP and TSP in proportion to the number of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students beneficiaries identified by the school based on school admissions include ICT; remedial courses; coaching for competitive exams; personality and soft skills development training; sports, art and music. 1 Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan: Currently, block earmarking of funds under SCSP and TSP for Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA) occurs without any specific allocations towards the equity aspects mentioned in the RMSA guidelines. This is particularly the case because the bulk of RMSA funds in general have flowed for the opening or strengthening of existing secondary schools; additional classrooms; science laboratories and computer rooms, libraries, arts/crafts/culture rooms, toilet blocks, additional recruitment and training of secondary school teachers. 2 Separate sub-scheme under RMSA for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Teacher Recruitment Drive and Training for two additional teachers (one Scheduled Caste and one Scheduled Tribe teacher) per block (total of around 6,000 teachers) which could be earmarked under the SCSP and TSP. Mid Day Meals 1 Earmarking of funds under SCSP and TSP may be increased to 21 per cent and 12 per cent respectively. The additional funds should be used for expanding the mid day meal scheme to private-unaided schools in the Scheduled Casteand Scheduled Tribe-populated Special Focus Districts that have 30 per cent or more Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe enrolment and the goal of promoting Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes education. This shall be done on the demand raised by the school or the local Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe community. The costs borne under SCSP and TSP would be for the provision of meals by an external body, so that additional infrastructure and personnel (e.g., cooking shed, cooks) in the school would not be required. 2 As part of the measures to combat discrimination, the scheme may revise the guidelines to mandate that 50 per cent of the mid day meal cooks should belong to the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe community and come from the local area. 41 3 A web-enabled MIS with interactive voice response system may be introduced for monitoring the mid day meals and registering any complaints of discrimination and other malpractices. 4 Model schools constructed in blocks with 40 per cent or more Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe population may be booked under the SCSP and TSP. Moreover, in such blocks, a minimum of 80 per cent students admitted to those schools shall be Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, ensuring 50:50 for girls and boys. 5 Model schools established in Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes populated blocks (above 40 per cent population, 135 blocks for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) shall be fully residential, and begin with Class 6 and continue up to Class 12. 6 In these schools, support systems for competitive examinations, remedial coaching if required, career guidance and vocational courses could be introduced. 7 Educational hubs may be established in those Scheduled Casteand Scheduled Tribe-populated blocks, which will require those additional facilities such as an educational resource centre and ICT facilities also linked to the model schools to encourage teachers to opt for these areas. 8 In addition to Scheduled Casteand Scheduled Tribe-populated blocks, blocks where the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe girls’ literacy rate is less than the national average and literacy gap between Scheduled Caste girls and other girls is higher than the national average should also be used to establish which hostels alone can be booked under the SCSP and TSP. 9 There should be a minimum of 80 per cent admission for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe girls in hostels constructed in these blocks with high Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe population and low Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe female literacy levels. For all Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe girls admitted into these hostels, the boarding/lodging expenses will be met under the SCSP and TSP. 10 Innovative schemes for these hostels may include ICT; remedial courses; coaching for competitive examinations for higher education; personality development and soft skills; sports, music and art. 11 The current pilots on mother-tongue based multi-lingual education may be scaled up in all the 109 Scheduled Tribe-populated Special Focus Districts to eventually cover all blocks in which children have similar home languages that differ from the state language. 12 SCERTs may organise ten-days training on multi-lingual education in their respective states/Union Territories with the support of university departments, professionals and knowledge-based NGOs, especially NGOs led by Scheduled Tribe members who speak those tribal languages. 42 13 DIETs may be commissioned to develop modules for Caste, Ethnicity and Gender Sensitisation courses for Teachers, as well as materials and methodologies to improve teacher skills in taking up inclusion activities in schools, along with experts in India and other experts in universities abroad. 14 For this purpose NCERT may be charged with undertaking a review of the national curriculum and generating the requisite education materials and curriculum based on the review. These would serve as guidelines for states/Union Territories to undertake similar reviews of their state curriculums and bring them into alignment with national norms. 15 NIOS may link the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes enrolled in their open schooling with vocational training. This should be achieved by first ascertaining the vocational training needs of these youth and the numbers of such youths interested in pursuing vocational training. Seats should be reserved within vocational courses for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in proportion to their population in the district where NIOS vocational courses are established, ensuring 5050 enrolment for girls and boys. All Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe youths admitted into vocational education courses should receive a fee waiver. Such fees would be instead booked and collected by NIOS under SCSP and TSP. 16 NIOS may link the information it has on Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes enrolments, retention and completion with the rolling out of an action plan to make open school education more equitable and inclusive for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students. 43 Annexures Annexure 1 The Schemes in School and Higher Education Sector In this section we discuss the various schemes and programme implemented by the Ministry of Human Resource Development in general, and in particular under SCSP and TSP. We also look at the financial allocation under the various schemes. This will help to identify gaps and develop new guidelines for effective implementation of the SCSP and TSP. The Department of School Education and Literacy has the following schemes that allocate the bulk of funding (over 95 per cent of the Department’s funding) under SCSP and/or TSP 2012-13. The detailed list is annexed. A total of Rs. 9,194 crores is allocated under these schemes towards the education needs of the Scheduled Caste children and Rs. 4,419 crores towards the education needs of Scheduled Tribe children.  Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan  National Programme of Mid Day Meals in Schools  Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan  Scheme for setting up 6000 model schools at block level as Benchmarks of Excellence  Elementary Education―Other Expenditure  Adult Education and Skill Development Scheme  Elementary Education―Teachers Training  Scheme for Construction and Running of Girls Hostels for Students of Secondary and Higher Secondary Schools  National Scheme for Incentive to the Girl Child for Secondary (SUCCESS)  Information and Communication Technologies in Schools  Secondary Education―Assistance to Non-Government Secondary Schools  Secondary Education―Other grants  Secondary Education―Research and Training  Secondary Education―Other expenditure  Adult education―Other Adult Education programmes  Mahila Samakhya Out of these schemes, SSA, National Programme of Mid Day Meals in Schools, RMSA, Scheme for setting up 6000 model schools and Scheme for Construction and Running of girls' hostels for Secondary and Higher Secondary schools account for over 80 per cent of allocations by the Department of School Education and Literacy under the SCSP and TSP. 44 Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) is the primary vehicle for ensuring elementary education for all children aged 6 to 14 years in the country, with its focus on adequate school infrastructure, personnel, academic support, etc. There is a specific focus on disadvantaged social groups, including Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and allowance is given for contextspecific interventions and strategies for the education of these target groups in line with the RTE Act of 2009. SSA has also targeted geographical areas in districts and blocks; where Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are concentrated in the matter of allocation of funds and school infrastructure to promote education. Special Focus Districts are currently identified with 25 per cent and above Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe populations as follows: • 61 districts with high Scheduled Caste population • 109 districts with high Scheduled Tribe population. However, the current challenge is to design specific schemes for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children to address the educational needs and issues of discrimination and exclusionary practices that these children face, which have been identified under the SSA Framework for Implementation Plan book (these issues are annexed for ready reference). While some state governments have been utilising the district innovation funds under SSA for these purposes, the full use of these funds by all state governments would go a long way in supporting Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children in completing elementary education. At present, the only direct benefits that Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children receive under SSA are financial support towards their uniforms, text books, or scholarships, which represents less than three per cent of funding allocation under the scheme. Hence, there is a need to scale up funding to ensure direct benefits to Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children in priority areas, namely residential schools, libraries, transport and escort facilities, training and interventions for urban deprived children of migrant workers (given that many Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes form the bulk of migrant labourers to urban areas living in poor conditions) and community mobilisation. SSA implementation could be further enhanced by strengthening the capacities of school management committees, supporting Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe mentors to encourage these children to enroll, attend and complete elementary schooling, ensure teachers and teaching in lower classes in the local Scheduled Tribe languages. Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan The RMSA guidelines specify that the educational development of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes and educationally backward minority children is a special focus in the scheme. Every activity under the programme should identify the benefit 45 that will accrue to children from these communities. Moreover, the participation of Scheduled Castes/ Scheduled Tribes/ Other Backward Classes and Minorities in the affairs of the school will be ensured through representation in the School Management Committees. RMSA is very progressive in nature, with a number of equity elements, namely: (i) special focus in micro-planning, addressing the needs of every child, especially for interventions for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students; (ii) preference to Ashram schools in upgradation; (iii) preference to areas with concentration of Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe/Minorities for opening of new schools; (iv) special enrolment drive for the weaker sections (including Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes); (v) more female teachers in schools; and (vi) separate toilet blocks for girls. The RMSA guidelines go as far as to suggest some equity strategies such as: free lodging/boarding facilities for students belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes and minority communities; hostels/residential schools; cash incentives, uniforms and books; providing scholarships to meritorious/needy students at the secondary level. While the bulk of RMSA funds have focused on ensuring the necessary infrastructure and personnel in secondary schools, priority to the aforementioned equity elements would ensure the objectives of the scheme are better met. This includes filling the gaps in terms of ensuring more secondary schools in Scheduled Casteand Scheduled Tribe-inhabited areas, fee waivers in residential schools for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children, the reorganisation of ashram schools into residential school complexes (as per the recommendation of the Working Group on Education for the Twelfth Five Year Plan), and the creation of innovative schemes to address the discrimination and exclusion of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children in secondary schools. National Programme of Mid-day Meals in Schools The provision of mid day meals in elementary schools is expected to help in achieve universal elementary education in the following ways: (i) by improving enrolment and regularity of attendance; (ii) reducing drop-outs; and (iii) by improving children’s level of learning and self-esteem. Given that Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children constitute the large number of children who are failing to regularly attend and dropping out of education before completing Class 8, the scheme provides direct benefits to a large number of these children who are currently in schools. At the same time, there are huge issues to be addressed, of quality food provisioning and multiple forms of discrimination against these children occurring during the distribution and eating of mid day meals. Moreover, given the current high enrolment ratios of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children (over 100), the challenge is to ensure that adequate funds flow to all these children to ensure quality mid day meals are provided to them. 46 Scheme for Construction of 6000 Model Schools as Benchmarks of Excellence Under this scheme, 3500 model schools will be set up in the Educationally Backward Blocks (EBBs) on the Kendriya Vidyalaya template. For these schools, priority will be given to Schedule V areas. Priority may also be given to Ashram Schools in case of upgradation/conversion of existing schools. Another set of 2,500 schools will be set up under Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode. The state/Union Territory governments will have the option to establish the school either with classes 6 to 12 or with classes 9 to 12. Existing reservations will apply to school admissions, i.e. 16 per cent for Scheduled Castes and eight per cent for Scheduled Tribes. The model schools present a unique opportunity to enhance the educational levels of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children. This could be achieved by building schools in Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe populated areas, linking the schools to residential hostels for these children, and ensuring a host of supportive schemes such as remedial coaching, vocational education courses, examination preparation, etc. Scheme for Construction and Running of Girls Hostels for Students of Secondary and Higher Secondary Schools This scheme, being implemented from 2009-10, aims to set up a 100-bedded Girls’ Hostel in each of the 3479 Educationally Backward Blocks (EBBs) in the country. The main objectives of the scheme are: (i) to retain the girl child in secondary school so that girl students are not denied the opportunity to continue their studies and (ii) to make Secondary and Senior Secondary education accessible to a larger number of girl students. Girl students in the age group of 14-18 years studying in classes 9 to 12 belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes, Minority communities and below poverty level families are the target group of the scheme. Students passing out of KGBV will be given preference in admission in hostels. At least 50 per cent of the girls admitted will be from Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes and Minority communities. Until January 2012, a few states have moved forward on this scheme, while revised proposals that conform to the norms under this scheme are awaited from other states. In this situation, a mechanism is required to ensure that within the current 50 per cent reservation, adequate numbers of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes girls are admitted into the hostels in keeping with their percentage population in the district. Organisations and Institutions related to School Education Two national institutes currently earmark small budget amounts (each less than Rs 5 crores in total) under SCSP and TSP – 1) National Council for Education Research and Training (NCERT); 2) Directorate of Adult Education. The National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS) currently does not earmark any of its budgets under SCSP and TSP. A review of the national curriculum from the perspective of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, which has not been undertaken to date, would enhance the relevance of the curriculum to the 47 Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes who comprise nearly one-quarter of the Indian population. The review should also enable requisite education materials and curriculum to be developed to enhance educational delivery to these social groups of children. This needs to be mirrored by an action plan for open schooling to make such education more equitable and inclusive for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and all other marginalised and disadvantaged social groups. Analysis of the nature of SCSP-TSP allocations under school education Rs 9198.8 crores under SCSP are allocated out the total Rs. 45,642 crores in the school education under the Ministry of Human Resource Development for 34 schemes. Ten schemes take up 97 per cent of the allocation and includes SSA, National programme for Mid Day meals, RMSA, elementary education other expenditure, Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas, setting up of 6000 model schools, adult education and skill development, teachers training for elementary education, girls hostels and Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan. Even within this, capital expenditure, grants in aid, administration and salaries takes up 97 per cent of the budget. On the other hand, only Rs. 14 crores is allocated for scholarships and stipends under the scheme, the National Means cum Merit Scholarships. The above allocations show low allocations for direct benefit to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes children which are the rights of all Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children like children of general category, and high allocations for general education expenditure. Hence, the allocations need to be revised to provide maximum direct benefit to Scheduled Castes children than for general education expenditures. Higher Education Sector The higher education institutions under the Ministry of Human Resource Development include various councils, higher education institutions and other institutions. These include, University Grant Commission, Indian Council of Social Science Research, Indian Council of Historical Research, Indian Council of Philosophical Research, All India Council of Technical Education, Distance Education Council, National Council of Teacher Education and similar organisations. Beside these councils, there are educational institutions such as IIT, NIT, IIM and others which are directly supported by Ministry of Human Resource Development. 48 The University Grants Commission is one of the largest Councils which fund and regulate a main segment of Higher education institutions. These include universities and the colleges all over the country. It provides development grants and other support under various schemes. University Grants Commission’s funding can be divided into few heads. (a) development, that plan and non-plan grants to central universities, (b) development grants to State universities including few deemed universities (c) grants to central and state universities and colleges under various schemes and (d) financial support under various schemes to the faculty and students. The University Grants Commission has mentioned that it has implemented the SCSP and TSP as shown in the annexure. However, the University Grants Commission does not spell out the actual procedure used to identify the beneficiaries. There is no data which indicates the actual numbers of beneficiaries--teachers and students. It is clear with the exception of some schemes which directly focused on Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes faculty and students, which account for a small proportion of University Grants Commission’s grants, the rest of the grant does not have a clear component of SCSP and TSP. For instance the University Grants Commission SCSP and TSP plan for the year 2011-12 which is supplied by University Grants Commission has 13 Schemes/Programmes under three major categories―Enhancing Aggregate access, Equity and Quality Excellence. In all these programmes/schemes out of a total of Rs. 780 crores allocated for Scheduled Castes, those that have clear benefit to the Scheduled Castes students is Rs. 63.36 crore which amounts to 8.12 per cent of the total amount. Similarly, in the case of Scheduled Tribes out of the total allocation for Scheduled Tribes under TSP, that is Rs 368 crores, only Rs 24 crores are allocated on the schemes which benefit the Scheduled Tribes directly and this account for only 6.52 per cent of the amount allocated on TSP. Thus, the University Grants Commission is was able to allocate directly only 8.12 per cent of funds to the persons from Scheduled Castes and 6.52 per cent to those from Scheduled Tribes. Thus, 92 per cent and 94 per cent of the allocated fund for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes respectively was spent on general schemes without any estimate of the actual Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe beneficiaries and the amount. Therefore, the Committee suggested the scheme for the implementation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Plan in the subsequent section. Other Councils 49 Other than University Grants Commission there are other council too. Three of them include Indian Council of Social Science Research, Indian Council of Historical Research and Indian Council of Philosophical Research. These three Councils are mandated for the following activities. Fund the research project for the faculty in the universities, colleges, research institutes • Institute and fund fellowships for faculty in universities and colleges and for PhD and post-doctoral students • Give financial support to institutions, associations, and journals engaged in research • Fund training in research methodology • Provide funds for publications of books • Fund international travel for conferences and • Fund international collaboration • Support national and international conferences The study of these three council, with the exception of some reservations, indicate that although the Ministry of Human Resource Development has indicated allocation under SCP and TSP, the Councils in most of the schemes have not made a specific earmarking of fund and beneficiaries belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes under SCSP and TSP. Therefore, in the section on recommendation we make specific suggestions for SCSP and TSP. IITs, NITs, NIIT, IIMs and other institutions Centres of Excellence These and other institutions are directly funded by the Ministry of Human Resource Development and the allocation is made separately for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes which are focused on them, like remedial coaching classes in English and some subjects. The requirements of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students are not adequately addressed. The other requirements such as coaching facilities, study equipment, books and other technical materials are excluded from the schemes. For some schemes the family income-ceiling for eligibility for non-charging of fees and for scholarships is also kept too high. In 2007 a Scholarship for Top-Class Education was introduced, under which meritorious Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students are provided financial assistance for pursuing professional and specialised courses in 182 identified institutions of excellence. The assistance provided includes reimbursement of fee, maintenance allowance, provision of 50 personal computers and books and stationery allowance. The income ceiling for availing the scholarship is Rs. 2 lakhs per annum. This good remained unutilised due the ceiling. The main issue in these institutions, namely University Grants Commission, Indian Council of Social Science Research, Indian Council of Historical Research, Indian Council of Philosophical Research, ETC, IITs, NITs, IIMs, etc., and similar education institutions is that with isolated exception, there are no Scheduled Casteand Scheduled Tribe-specific schemes currently implemented by Indian Council of Social Science Research, Indian Council of Historical Research or other similar council or bodies although they receive funds under SCSP and TSP allocations. These bodies thus continued to show the allocation in a notional manner with the number of actual beneficiaries from Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Therefore, in actuality the fund under SCSP and TSP remained hugely underutilised. 51 Annexure 2 The Current Educational Problems of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in School Education Sector After having a look at the present status of SCSP and TSP, we now look at the current issues confronting the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students in school and higher education institutions and their implications for the policy and schemes to be considered under the SCSP and TSP. Status of School Education of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Children’s Population in India It is currently projected that 487.4 lakh Scheduled Caste children (256.3 lakh boys and 23.1 lakh girls) and 249 lakh Scheduled Tribe children (128 lakh boys and 121 lakh girls) are in the 6-18 years age group in the country today. Availability of Schools The drive under Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) for universal elementary education (UEE) has resulted in expansion of primary and middle schools run by the government. Currently there are 8,23,162 primary schools and 3,67,745 middle schools across the country. The number of private and private-aided schools is low at the elementary level. However, as one moves up to higher levels of schooling, the number of private and private-aided schools increases. Over 50 per cent of high schools and higher secondary schools across the country are private and private-aided today. Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Enrolment in Schools The enrolment ratio for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes children in elementary education across the country today is reasonably high, in keeping with the national average, though gender disparities in enrolments remain. The enrolment ratios, however, drop significantly at secondary and senior secondary education for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students. Scheduled Tribe girls have the lowest enrolment ratios in secondary and higher secondary education, significantly lower than Scheduled Caste girls and girls in general. Moreover, as mentioned earlier, enrolment does not necessarily translate into Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children regularly attending school at any level of school education. In Open Schools, Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children’s enrolment in secondary and senior secondary classes for the general education is in keeping with their share of the national population, though fewer girls than boys are enrolled across the different levels of 52 open schooling. However, fewer Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes students enrol in the vocational education through Open Schools much lower than their presence in the population. Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe Dropout Rates from Schooling While enrolment ratios and numbers are high, a more alarming trend is the high rate of dropout among Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes children (in classes 1-10, 59.71 for Scheduled Castes and 75.21 for Scheduled Tribes). Among all children, Scheduled Tribe children have the highest dropout rates, both for boys and girls, whether it is from classes 1-5, classes 1-8, or classes 1-10. It must be mentioned that a more realistic comparison could be got if one were to compare indicators for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children with that of children from forward castes than with the combined data of ‘All Children’ which includes the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribe children, thereby depressing the numbers. Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Education Attainment In terms of educational outcomes, all primary and upper primary schools have shifted from an exam-based system to continuous and comprehensive evaluation (CCE) under the Right to Education Act. In the higher secondary examinations, however, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students continue to perform much lower than students in general. Of the students who passed the examinations, around one-third of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students obtained below 50 per cent marks. Around 30 per cent of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students obtained first division marks as compared to around 40 per cent for all categories of students. The implications are that many Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students will not have the marks to be able to access higher education. This is especially in central education institutions like IITs, IIMs, etc., where admissions are now based on competitive exams as well as aggregate marks in Class 12. The National Achievement Survey (2012), conducted by National Council of Education, Research and Training (NCERT) for Class 5 students in 27 states and four Union Territories found that Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students underperformed compared to general students across subjects. Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Teachers In terms of the teaching profession, there are currently 8,16,809 Scheduled Castes teachers and 5,98,487 ST teachers in the country. As far as Scheduled Castes teachers are concerned, this is less than their percentage share of the population (12.7 per cent as compared to 16.5 per cent). Discrimination in Schools Another problem that Dalit students faced in schools and in higher education institutions relates to discrimination in some spheres. The studies brings out the discriminatory treatment experienced by the Dalit children in accessing services in Anganwadi, ICDS, Mid-day meal, classes in term of separate sitting, less attention towards them from teachers, and differential 53 treatment in cultural and social spheres in the schools. The Committees also revealed discrimination in higher education institutions. Emerging Issues in School Sector a) Enrolment at the elementary level is more or less on par with others. b) The enrolment ratio however, drops significantly at secondary and higher secondary level. How to retain high levels of enrolment ratio at these two levels is an issue that needs to be address under SCSP and TSP. c) Similarly, the dropout rate among Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe children (in classes 1 to10 class) is high. d) Similarly, the attainment rate (reaching up to higher secondary examinations) among the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students is much lower than students in general. Of the students who passed higher secondary examination, around one-third of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students obtained below 50 per cent marks. Around 30 per cent of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students obtained first division marks as compared to around 40 per cent for all categories of students. This means that many Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe students will not have the marks to be able access higher education. e) Another problem that Scheduled Caste students specially face is discrimination in school Thus the issues relates to lower enrolment ratio at secondary and higher secondary level, high dropout rate at various school level, low attainment or achievement level and discrimination in some spheres are the ones which need to be addressed under SCSP and TSP. 54 Annexure 3 The Current Educational Problems of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Higher Education Sector Enrolment rate for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Over a span of time there has been some improvement in the enrolment of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in higher education. However, the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes continue to lag behind the other groups. The latest year for which the data is available from National Sample Survey is 2007-08. Rural Areas―Total, male and female In 2007-08, in rural areas, the gross enrolment rate was about 11 per cent at overall levels. However, the gross enrolment rate was much lower for the Scheduled Tribes (five per cent), and the Scheduled Castes (8.30 per cent) as compared to the Other Backward Classes (11 per cent) and higher castes (17 per cent). Thus, gross enrolment rate for the Scheduled Tribes was two times less than Other Backward Classes and three times less as compared with higher castes. There are gender disparities in gross enrolment rates―the gross enrolment rate for the males and the females stood at 8.38 percentage points and 13.745 percentage points respectively. Although the enrolment rates are generally lower for the females as compared to the males, it is the female belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes who suffered from low enrolment in higher education institutions. For instance in 2007-08, as against the overall average of 8.38 per cent for all females, gross enrolment rate was 3.40 per cent for Scheduled Tribes and six per cent for Scheduled Castes. Thus, the gross enrolment rate for Scheduled Tribe females was about four times lower compared to those from higher castes. Similarly, gross enrolment rate among the Scheduled Caste females was lower by about four times as compared to the higher caste females. Urban―Total, male and female In 2007-08, in urban areas, the gross enrolment rate was about 30 per cent at overall levels. However, the gross enrolment rate was lower for the Scheduled Tribes (25.6 per cent), and the Scheduled Castes (20.5 per cent), compared to the Other Backward Classes (25.2. per cent) and higher castes (38 per cent). Thus, gross enrolment rate among the Scheduled Castes was the lowest compared with Other Backward Classes/higher caste. The Scheduled Castes in urban area seems to lag behind all other groups. 55 As regards gender differences, the differences in gross enrolment rate for the males and the females are much less. The gross enrolment rate between males and females in urban areas at an overall level is 30 per cent for both males and females. A similar pattern was observed for all social groups, with a small difference for Scheduled Castes, and Other Backward Classes, but somewhat more for Scheduled Tribes (about 2.3 percentage points difference) and slightly higher for higher caste (about 3.30 percentage points difference). Income Poor-Non Poor―Total (rural and urban combined) As far as the enrolment rates among the poor and the non-poor are concerned, again significant disparities were observed. In 2007-08, (latest year for which the consumption expenditure data are available), the gross enrolment rate for the lowest quintile (monthly per capita expenditure Rs 20-40) stood at five per cent as against 37.50 per cent for the upper quintile non-poor; (monthly per capita expenditure being Rs 80-100 ) the average value being 17.3 per cent at an overall level. Thus, gross enrolment rate among the poor was about eight times lower compared to the non-poor. The similar disparity is observed for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. The gross enrolment rate for the lowest quintile of Scheduled Castes (5.8 per cent) was about five times lower than the upper quintile among them (28 per cent), and the lower quintile of Scheduled Tribes (2.6 per cent) was about eight times lower compared with the upper quintile (24.5 per cent). It is important to note that although the gross enrolment rate of the lower quintile is generally lower than upper quintile, the gross enrolment rate of Scheduled Tribes (2.6 per cent) was lower than that of the higher castes (6.7 per cent). Similarly, the gross enrolment rate of Scheduled Castes was 5.8 per cent which was lower than the 6.7 per cent of higher castes. So the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes seem to suffer more than their counterpart from higher castes. Between Occupational Groups The National Sample Survey data permits us to estimate the enrolment rate by occupation, for self employed farmers and wage labourer households. Differences in gross enrolment rate are also equally visible across occupational groups in the rural and the urban areas. In the rural areas, gross enrolment rate is generally higher among the self-employed households engaged in farm and non-farm economic activities as compared with those engaged as wage labourers in farm and non-farm activities. For instance in 2007-08, gross enrolment rate for the rural self-employed farmer and non-farm households combined was about 12 per cent compared with 4.3 per cent for farm wage labour and 6.8 per cent for nonfarm wage labour in rural areas. 56 Similarly, in the urban areas, the gross enrolment rate was 24.1 per cent for self employed, 31 per cent for regular salaried but only 8.3 per cent for casual wage labour. Thus, both in the rural and the urban areas the enrolment rates for the casual wage labourers were the lowest as compared with self-employed, regular wage and salaried workers. Caste and Occupation Among all the occupational groups the enrolment was particularly low for the Scheduled Tribes followed by the Scheduled Castes, the Other Backward Classes, and the higher caste. Thus, gross enrolment rate was lower for the farm and non-farm wage labourers particularly belonging to the Scheduled Tribes (1.40 per cent) compared with the rest, the differences being less between Scheduled Castes, Other Backward Classes and higher castes. In the case of non-farm wage labour in rural areas, the same pattern follows. Similarly, in the urban areas, gross enrolment rate for casual labour stood at 8.3 per cent overall as against 9.12 and 6.6 percentage points for the Scheduled Tribes, the Scheduled Castes, and the higher caste respectively. Similarly, in case of self-employed farmers the gross enrolment rate was relatively low for Scheduled Tribes compared with the rest. The gross enrolment rate of Scheduled Castes was lower than Other Backward Classes and higher caste. In the case of the self-employed in nonfarm activities, similar differences were observed. In urban areas the situation was somewhat different. The gross enrolment rate was relatively low for Scheduled Castes and more or less similar for Scheduled Tribes and higher caste. Among the self-employed and wage labourers, enrolment was particularly low for poor households in rural and urban areas. It was particularly low among the wage labour households. Eligible Enrolment ratio―Proportion of those who joined higher education after higher secondary The eligibility enrolment ratio is a measure which gives us the proportion of higher secondary students that joined the higher education system. We have estimated on eligibility enrolment ratio for 2004-05. In 2004-05 EER was 54.4 per cent for the Scheduled Tribes, and 57 per cent for the Scheduled Castes, and 62.5 per cent for the higher castes. Lower eligibility enrolment ratio for Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes compared with higher castes indicate that, of those who managed to complete higher secondary stage, a small proportion entered into higher educational streams. About 46 per cent to 43 per cent drop out and joined courses other than a degree or take up jobs of some sort. 57 The eligibility enrolment ratio stood at 62.9 and 54.1 percentage points for the male and the female population respectively. As is evident, the ratio for the females was lower by about nine percentage points than the males. The eligibility enrolment ratio was much lower in case of Scheduled Castes girls―50 percentage points as compared to 57 percentage points for Scheduled Tribes and other high caste females. Summary―Social and economic groups with low Gross Enrolment Rate The recent situation from the discussion above indicates that despite a positive trend in enrolment, the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes suffer from low access to higher education compared with high castes. There is also a huge rural-urban divide and the extent of enrolment is low in the rural areas as compared with the urban areas. The enrolment rates remain low for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in comparison to the higher castes. Further, the enrolment rates remain predictably low among the females as compared to males. As regards economic groups, the enrolment rates are quite low among the poor and particularly low among persons engaged in wage labour as compared with those engaged in self-employed farm and non-farm economic activities. Thus the social groups, which suffered most from lack of access to higher education, are the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. Among them, those engaged as wage labourers in the rural and the urban areas, and particularly poor among them were the girls compared with boys. Education being a social need for everybody, in a majority of the countries, efforts have been made to provide education by public or private providers, in a manner such that everybody gets fair access and an opportunity to develop their human capabilities, so that they are able to participate and benefit from the gains of economic development. The economic opportunities in terms of access to resources and income may be unequal, but equal access to higher education and skill to all persons, poor and non poor help to use economic opportunities on an equal footing. It is in this sense in unequal societies, education serves as an equaliser by offering equal opportunities to everyone to develop their human capabilities. Low access to higher education in India to Scheduled Tribes, Scheduled Castes, females (particularly from rural area), persons engaged in wage labour as main occupation and finally the poor (irrespective of their social position/religion/gender) reduces their chances to expand their human capabilities and eventually places them in a position of disadvantage to use the opportunities offered by economic growth. Unfortunately, the groups with low access to higher education constitute a sizable section of Indian’s population. Unlike many countries, where education has served as an instrument of equal opportunity, in India, by offering unequal access to higher education to poor and marginalised social groups, education turns out to be a prominent source of economic inequalities. This is the most disturbing feature of our higher education system, which has been growing at a great pace with less inclusive privatisation of higher education since the mid 1980s. 58 In 2009-10, of the total students in professional courses such as agriculture, engineering and medicine, about 44 per cent were in private unaided institutions, and the remaining 53.5 per cent in non-private institutions which include government, local body and private-aided institutions. This revealed the magnitude of privatisation of professional education in the country. However, due to the cost factor, the proportion of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes was lower compared with Other Backward Classes and higher caste. The percentage enrolled in private unaided institutions was 28 per cent for Scheduled Tribes, 27 per cent for Scheduled Castes, compared to 44 per cent for Other Backward Classes and 49 per cent for higher caste. The low access to private unaided institutions is reflected in lower share of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in total of students enrolled in private-unaided institutions. Of the total students enrolled in private-unaided professional institutions, the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes account two per cent and six per cent, while Other Backward Classes and higher castes share is 36.25 per cent and 56 per cent respectively. The Other Backward Classes and higher castes thus account for 92 per cent of total students in private-unaided institutions, which is far higher than their share in population, while the share of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes was much lower than their population share. Therefore, we have to give a serious reconsideration to our higher education policy for inclusive education. The state has to own the responsibility to provide higher education to those who deserve and desire, and the participation of private sector should be such that it provides access to education to the poor and disadvantaged sections in society. The policy interventions should recognise the constraints that these groups face in accessing higher education. Therefore, while addressing these constraints, we must develop group-specific interventions and support mechanisms to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes under SCP and TSP. Emerging Issues that need attainment under SCSP and TSP a) Low enrolment―The overall enrolment ratio are lower for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes compared with others. The enrolment ratios are low in rural areas as compared to those in urban areas. The enrolment ratios are lower among female as compared to males both in rural area and urban areas. The enrolment ratios are quite low among the poor. The enrolment ratios are also relatively low among farm and non-farm wage labour, compared with self employed in farm and non-farm and regularised salaries. Thus, the social groups which suffered most from lack of access to higher education are the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and among them those engaged as wage labourers in the rural and the urban areas, and particularly the poor among them and the girls compared with boys. 59 b) Among those who complete higher secondary, a low proportion joins higher education. A high proportion drop out and resort to diplomas of various duration and take jobs. c) The Scheduled Caste students also faced discrimination in higher education institutions. d) The skill in English language is relatively poor and they also lag in some basic subjects. d) Poor students face financial problems, particularly in accessing professional courses. The issues that need to be addressed include: increase in enrolment ratio in post higher secondary level by some measures, support to wage labour and poor to increase enrolment rate. Those who drop out at higher secondary level require support for vocational education. Coaching to improve fluency in English language and social skills, and support in basic courses is also necessary. Steps to check discrimination in higher education institutions and financial support through scholarship /fellowship, hostel, study Current Issues related to higher education of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes In the light of this description on the status of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in higher education, we can identify the current problems of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. The issues that need attainment under SCSP and TSP relates to the following. a) Low enrolment: Among the social groups, enrolment rates are lower for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes compared with other. The enrolment rate is still lower in rural areas as compared to urban areas. The enrolment rate is lower among females as compared to males in both rural areas and urban areas. The gap is particularly is high in rural areas. The enrolment rate is quite low among the poor. Among the livelihood category, the enrolment rates are also relatively low among farm and non-farm wage labour, compared with the self-employed in farm and non-farm and regularised salaries. Thus, among the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, those engaged as wage laborers in the rural and the urban areas, and particularly the poor among them and the girls compared with boys suffered from low access to higher education. b) Those who complete higher secondary, a low proportion of them join higher education. High proportion get dropout and resort to diplomas of various duration and take jobs. 60 c) There are problems possibly related to English language and some core subjects which lead to poor performance and drop out. Therefore, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes need further attention, as lack of suitable support through remedial teaching in English language and core subjects is one of the reasons for poor performance, repeated failure and drop out. c) The discrimination of Dalit students may be another reason for poor performance in studies in higher education institutions. d) Financial problems faced by the poor students also affect their access to education, particularly in professional institutions. e) Lack of necessary physical infrastructure such as hostels, study rooms, etc., is also a reason, particularly for the poor students who, due to financial difficulties, cannot afford private facilities for stay and due study. The issues that need to be address include: increase in enrolment rate in post higher secondary level, poor and wage labour students is critical. Support to students in the studies for language improvement and some core subject in college and universities, so that drop-out rate is checked. Those who drop out at higher secondary level need support for vocational education. Steps to check discrimination in higher education institutions and financial support through scholarship/fellowship, hostel, and study centres also need to be addressed. 61 Annexure 4 Table 1: Children’s projected population in India, 2009 (in lakhs) Age Groups SCs STs Non-SCs/STs Boys Girls Total Boys Girls Total Boys Girls Total 6-10 years 107.8 98.6 206.4 56.3 53.1 109.4 449.0 410.1 859.1 11-13 years 64.2 58.8 123.1 31.4 29.7 61.1 280.9 263.9 544.8 14-15 years 42.7 37.7 80.4 21.3 19.8 41.1 189.5 176.9 366.4 16-17 years 41.6 35.9 77.5 19.0 18.4 37.4 196.1 180.8 376.9 Total 256.3 231.0 487.4 128.0 121.0 249.0 1111.5 1031.7 2147.2 Source: Provisional Statistics of School Education (2009-2010), Ministry of Human Resource Development Table 2: Number of Institutions by Management, 2009-10 (percentages in brackets) Types of Management Pre-primary Primary Middle High School Higher Secondary Government 32873 (48.47) 517347 (62.85) 210796 (57.32) 39166 (31.66) 30565 (45.68) Local Bodies 17756 (26.18) 189021 (22.96) 580866 (15.79) 10320 (8.34) 322 (0.48) Private-aided 2659 (3.92) 54052 (6.57) 39258 (10.68) 29622 (23.94) 11953 (17.86) Private Unaided 14534 (21.43) 62742 (7.62) 59625 (16.21) 44618 (36.06) 24077 (35.98) Total 67,822 (100.00) 8,23,162 (100.00) 3,67,745 (100.00) 1,23,726 (100.00) 66,917 (100.00) Source: Provisional Statistics of School Education (2009-2010), Ministry of Human Resource Development Table 3: Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) Classes SCs STs All Boys Girls Total Boys Girls Total Boys Girls Total 1-5 127.81 128.72 128.25 139.73 137.44 138.62 115.55 115.39 115.47 6-8 90.51 86.59 88.63 87.81 78.81 83.43 84.53 78.30 81.52 9-10 71.19 63.50 67.58 54.24 44.22 49.41 66.65 58.45 62.71 11-12 37.42 33.48 35.60 31.36 22.32 26.91 38.31 33.31 35.92 Source: Provisional Statistics of School Education (2009-2010), Ministry of Human Resource Development 62 Table 4: Enrolment in School Education (percentage of total boys, girls, all children in brackets) Classes SC ST All Categories Boys Girls Total Boys Girls Total Boys Girls Total Preprimary 386646 (12.71) 339038 (12.29) 725684 565172 528524 1093696 3041270 2758059 (12.51) (9.74) (9.11) (18.85) (100.00) (100.00) 5799329 (100.00) 1-5 13779333 (19.44) 12691973 (17.91) 26471306 7868040 7300321 (19.51) (11.10) (11.26) 15168361 (11.18) 70845102 (100.00) 64824741 (100.00) 135669843 (100.00) 6-8 5813299 (18.26) 5094328 (18.46) 10907627 2756643 2339912 (18.35) (8.66) (8.48) 5096555 (8.57) 31828181 (100.00) 27592821 (100.00) 59421002 (100.00) 9-10 3040479 (17.99) 2395017 (17.47) 5435496 1154348 876208 (17.76) (6.83) (6.39) 2030556 (6.63) 16895843 (100.00) 13702676 (100.00) 30598519 (100.00) 11-12 1557924 (15.84) 1201683 (15.34) 2759607 595714 410088 (15.61) (6.05) (5.23) 1005802 (5.69) 9834670 (100.00) 7832674 (100.00) 17667344 (100.00) Total 24191035 21383001 45574036 12374745 10926529 23301274 129403796 113952912 243356708 Source: Provisional Statistics of School Education (2009-2010), Ministry of Human Resource Development Table 5: Enrolment in Open Schools (percentage of total boys, girls, all children in brackets) Classes SC ST All Categories Boys Girls Total Boys Girls Total Boys Girls Total Secondary (15.38) 19945 6389 (11.16) 26334 (14.09) 7711 (5.94) 7287 (12.73) 14998 (8.02) 129629 (100.00) 57234 (100.00) 186863 (100.00) Senior Secondary 17131 (13.59) 5683 (10.59) 22814 5990 5287 11277 126040 53618 (12.69) (4.75) (9.86) (6.27) (100.00) (100.00) 179658 (100.00) Vocational 697 (8.3) 919 (6.83) 1616 244 222 466 8397 13453 (7.39) (2.90) (16.5) (2.13) (100.00) (100.00) 21850 (100.00) Total 37773 12991 50674 13945 12796 27641 264066 124305 388371 Source: Provisional Statistics of School Education (2009-2010), Ministry of Human Resource Development Table 6: Drop-out Rates Classes SCs STs All Categories Boys Girls Total Boys Girls Total Boys Girls Total 1-5 32.67 25.31 29.33 35.19 33.72 34.5 30.25 27.25 28.86 1-8 50.59 51.99 51.25 55.15 60.64 57.78 40.59 44.39 42.39 1-10 58.47 59.47 59.71 74.71 75.85 75.21 53.38 51.38 51.76 Source: Provisional Statistics of School Education (2009-2010), Ministry of Human Resource Development. 63 Table 7: Results of Higher Secondary Examination, 2009 Categories Total Students Passed (in lakhs) No of children (in lakhs) who have passed higher secondary examination by percentage of marks achieved. Below 50% 50% 60% Above 60% SC 9.60 2.84 (29.76) 3.66 (38.32) 3.05 (31.91) ST 3.10 1.11 (35.72) 1.15 (37.18) 0.84 (27.08) All Categories 75.47 17.62 (23.34) 27.40 (36.31) 30.44 (40.34) Source: Results of High School and Higher Secondary Examinations, 2009, Ministry of Human Resource Development Figures in brackets indicate the percentage in each category. Table 8: Number of SC and ST Teachers, 2010-11 Total Number of Teachers Distribution of SC Teachers to Total Teachers Distribution of ST Teachers to Total Teachers Total no. of SC teachers % to Total Teachers Total no. of ST teachers % to Total Teachers 64,03,234 8,16,809 12.76 5,98,487 9.35 Table 9: Enrolment of number of SC and ST students in 2009-10 Courses SC ST Undergraduate Courses 1677239 Post Graduate 202180 PhD/ MPhil 9119 Open Universities 325394 268641 BE/ BSc (Engg.)/BArch 2006-07 287730 100287 Polytechnic Institutes 2006-07 109204 56235 Source: indiastat.com Table 10: Number of SC/ST Students Admitted in Post Graduate Courses of IITs (2001-02 to 2005-06) Institutes Total students admitted 2005-2006 2004-2005 2003-2004 SC % ST % SC % ST % SC % ST % IIT Delhi 130 9.27 22 1.57 94 7.67 11 0.9 119 8.42 22 0.14 IIT Bombay 72 8.71 20 3.68 52 9.07 21 4.94 57 9.59 22 6.44 IIT Kanpur 127 10.47 6 0.42 114 10.26 7 2.93 94 9.29 7 2 IIT Kharagpur 131 12.82 50 4.89 89 10.22 30 3.44 82 11.45 26 3.63 IIT Madras 61 14.67 21 10 71 15 26 6.5 52 10 24 8 IIT Roorkee 93 12.4 22 3 101 12.6 36 4.5 90 12 45 6.01 IIT Guwahati 36 15.05 11 4.1 26 9.5 7 4.5 20 8.4 7 3.15 64 Table 11: Gross Attendance Ratio (CAR %) in age group 18-22 years by gender and poverty status in 2004-05 Social groups Male Female Person Poor Non-poor Total Poor Non-poor Total Poor Non-poor Total ST 3.9 13.9 11.2 1.9 11.7 8.4 2.7 12.8 9.8 SC 4.3 14.5 12.4 2.3 9.6 7.8 3.3 12.3 10.3 OBC 3.7 18.7 16.4 2.6 11.9 10.2 3.1 15.5 13.5 Others 5.0 30.7 28.0 3.3 25.2 22.7 4.2 28.2 25.5 Total 4.2 21.7 18.9 2.6 16.0 13.4 3.3 19.0 16.3 Source: NSSO Employment-Unemployment 2004-05 Table 12: Gross Attendance Ratio (GAR %) in age group 18-22 years by location and MPCE quintile group in 2004-05 ST SC OBC Others Total Rural 0-20 1.9 2.2 1.9 1.2 1.9 20-40 3.6 3.1 4.1 3.1 3.6 40-60 4.9 4.2 5.3 5.5 5.0 60-80 6.5 7.2 9.2 11.5 9.3 80-100 21.4 20.9 20.9 25.8 22.9 Total 6.3 6.9 9.3 13.8 9.6 Urban 0-20 2.8 4.9 4.8 5.3 4.9 20-40 10.6 10.4 11.4 11.8 11.3 40-60 29.8 17.7 20.9 23.6 21.6 60-80 47.7 38.8 31.1 41.0 38.1 80-100 69.0 60.2 68.3 76.5 73.1 Total 32.0 20.0 24.6 40.9 31.3 Rural + Urban 0-20 2.0 3.1 3.0 3.2 2.9 20-40 4.4 5.3 6.4 7.3 6.2 40-60 7.9 7.4 9.9 13.5 10.2 60-80 15.5 14.2 14.1 24.2 17.8 80-100 27.9 27.5 30.2 45.9 37.0 Total 9.8 10.3 13.5 25.5 16.3 65 Table 13: Gross Attendance Ratio (GAR %) in age group 18-22 years by Gender and MPCE quintile group in 2004-05-Total ST SC OBC Others Total Male 0-20 2.9 4.4 3.8 3.5 3.8 20-40 6.2 7.2 8.7 9.5 8.3 40-60 10.2 9.7 13.3 15.6 12.8 60-80 14.6 15.1 15.7 26.3 19.2 80-100 27.8 30.2 33.9 47.6 39.6 Total 11.2 12.4 16.4 28.0 18.9 Female 0-20 1.3 1.9 2.2 2.9 2.1 20-40 2.8 3.3 4.2 5.0 4.0 40-60 5.7 4.7 6.1 11.3 7.2 60-80 16.7 13.0 12.3 21.7 16.2 80-100 28.1 24.2 25.4 43.6 33.8 Total 8.4 7.8 10.2 22.7 13.4 Person 0-20 2.0 3.1 3.0 3.2 2.9 20-40 4.4 5.3 6.4 7.3 6.2 40-60 7.9 7.4 9.9 13.5 10.2 60-80 15.5 14.2 14.1 24.2 17.8 80-100 27.9 27.5 30.2 45.9 37.0 Total 9.8 10.3 13.5 25.5 16.3 Table 14: Gross Attendance Ratio (GAR %) in age group 18-22 years by location and MPCE quintile group in 2007-08 ST SC OBC Others Total Rural 0-20 2.0 5.0 2.8 5.7 3.7 20-40 1.0 4.1 5.9 6.4 4.9 40-60 3.2 6.0 6.4 10.5 6.8 60-80 6.7 8.1 8.4 15.1 9.9 80-100 16.3 21.5 25.5 29.1 25.7 Total 4.9 8.3 10.6 16.9 11.1 Urban 0-20 7.4 7.6 7.4 7.9 7.6 20-40 7.9 15.3 14.2 15.6 14.7 40-60 24.1 21.0 20.3 28.0 23.9 60-80 29.8 27.0 37.8 41.6 37.7 80-100 66.8 63.1 61.7 66.7 65.2 Total 25.6 20.5 25.2 38.2 30.2 Rural + Urban 0-20 2.6 5.8 4.5 6.7 5.0 20-40 1.9 7.3 8.7 10.7 8.2 40-60 6.5 10.4 10.2 19.7 12.6 60-80 10.1 13.1 16.2 27.7 18.9 80-100 24.2 27.3 32.3 44.9 36.9 Total 7.7 11.6 14.7 26.8 17.2 66 Table 15: Gross Attendance Ratio (GAR %) in age group 18-22 years by Gender and MPCE quintile group in 2007-08-Total ST SC OBC Others Total Male 0-20 3.5 7.9 4.4 8.1 5.9 20-40 2.0 8.9 10.3 12.9 9.9 40-60 7.6 11.4 12.6 20.3 14.1 60-80 11.1 14.8 17.3 28.1 20.0 80-100 28.6 29.3 36.3 45.1 39.0 Total 9.3 13.4 17.0 28.0 19.1 Female 0-20 1.7 3.6 4.5 5.3 4.1 20-40 1.7 5.4 6.9 8.3 6.4 40-60 5.4 9.4 7.6 19.0 10.9 60-80 9.1 11.2 14.8 27.1 17.7 80-100 19.0 24.7 27.4 44.5 34.3 Total 6.1 9.5 12.2 25.3 15.2 Person 0-20 2.6 5.8 4.5 6.7 5.0 20-40 1.9 7.3 8.7 10.7 8.2 40-60 6.5 10.4 10.2 19.7 12.6 60-80 10.1 13.1 16.2 27.7 18.9 80-100 24.2 27.3 32.3 44.9 36.9 Total 7.7 11.6 14.7 26.8 17.2 Table 16: Gross Attendance Ratio (CAR %) in age group 18-22 years by gender and location in 2007-08 Social groups Rural Urban Rural + Urban Male Female Total Male Female Total Male Female Total ST 6.4 3.4 4.9 26.7 24.4 25.6 9.3 6.1 7.7 SC 10.4 5.9 8.3 21.0 20.0 20.5 13.4 9.5 11.6 OBC 13.3 7.7 10.6 25.9 24.3 25.2 17.0 12.2 14.7 Others 20.2 13.4 16.9 36.6 40.3 38.2 28.0 25.3 26.8 Total 13.7 8.3 11.1 29.8 30.6 30.2 19.1 15.2 17.2 Source: NSSO Participation and Expenditure in Education 2007-08 Table 17: Gross Attendance Ratio (CAR %) in age group 18-22 years by household type of Rural areas in 2007-08 Household Types ST SC OBC Others Total Rural self-employed non-agriculture 3.1 10.1 10.0 17.5 11.8 Rural self-employed agriculture 6.9 10.4 10.3 15.9 11.6 Rural agriculture labour 1.4 5.0 4.0 6.5 4.4 Rural other labour 1.4 7.5 7.9 6.7 6.9 Rural others 20.5 19.5 34.4 37.5 32.0 Total 4.9 8.3 10.6 16.9 11.1 Source: NSSO Participation and Expenditure in Education 2007-08 67 Table 18: Gross Attendance Ratio (CAR %) in age group 18-22 years by household type of Urban areas in 2007-08 Household Types ST SC OBC Others Total Urban self-employed 21.6 13.3 19.7 30.9 24.1 Urban regular earning 23.3 24.0 30.8 41.0 33.8 Urban casual labour 9.0 12.2 7.6 5.3 8.4 Urban others 65.1 60.7 69.2 78.9 73.6 Total 25.6 20.5 25.2 38.2 30.2 Source: NSSO Participation and Expenditure in Education 2007-08 Table 19: Gross Attendance Ratio (CAR %) in age group 18-22 years by household type of Rural+Urban areas in 2007-08 Household Types ST SC OBC Others Total Rural self-employed non-agriculture 3.1 10.1 10.0 17.5 11.8 Rural self-employed agriculture 6.9 10.4 10.3 15.9 11.6 Rural agriculture labour 1.4 5.0 4.0 6.5 4.4 Rural other labour 1.4 7.5 7.9 6.7 6.9 Rural others 20.5 19.5 34.4 37.5 32.0 Urban self-employed 21.6 13.3 19.7 30.9 24.1 Urban regular earning 23.3 24.0 30.8 41.0 33.8 Urban casual labour 9.0 12.2 7.6 5.3 8.4 Urban others 65.1 60.7 69.2 78.9 73.6 Total 7.7 11.6 14.7 26.8 17.2 Source: NSSO Participation and Expenditure in Education 2007-08 Table 20: Gross Attendance Ratio (CAR %) in age group 18-22 years by household type of Male in 2007-08 Household Types ST SC OBC Others Total Rural self-employed non-agriculture 1.6 11.7 12.9 18.2 13.7 Rural self-employed agriculture 9.1 12.9 12.5 19.0 14.0 Rural agr iculture labour 2.4 7.3 4.9 8.2 5.9 Rural other labour 1.4 8.8 6.9 7.3 7.1 Rural others 22.6 21.2 49.4 46.9 41.6 Urban self-employed 27.5 15.6 20.8 29.1 24.2 Urban regular earning 21.0 22.7 30.8 37.0 31.6 Urban casual labour 8.8 14.8 7.5 5.2 9.0 Urban others 65.6 69.8 66.6 82.5 75.7 Total 9.3 13.4 17.0 28.0 19.1 Source: NSSO Participation and Expenditure in Education 2007-08 68 Table 21: Gross Attendance Ratio (CAR %) in age group 18-22 years by household type of Female in 2007-08 Household Types ST SC OBC Others Total Rural self-employed non-agriculture 4.4 8.5 7.0 16.7 9.9 Rural self-employed agriculture 4.6 7.1 7.9 12.7 8.9 Rural agriculture labour 0.4 2.4 3.1 4.8 2.8 Rural other labour 1.4 6.1 9.0 5.9 6.7 Rural others 17.9 17.4 18.6 26.6 21.2 Urban self-employed 15.8 10.1 18.5 33.1 24.1 Urban regular earning 26.1 25.7 30.7 45.5 36.4 Urban casual labour 9.1 8.9 7.8 5.6 7.6 Urban others 64.3 53.7 73.3 74.1 70.7 Total 6.1 9.5 12.2 25.3 15.2 Source: NSSO Participation and Expenditure in Education 2007-08 Table 22: Gross Attendance Ratio (CAR %) in age group 18-22 years by household type of Male+Female in 2007-08 Household Types ST SC OBC Others Total Rural self-employed non-agriculture 3.1 10.1 10.0 17.5 11.8 Rural self-employed agriculture 6.9 10.4 10.3 15.9 11.6 Rural agriculture labour 1.4 5.0 4.0 6.5 4.4 Rural other labour 1.4 7.5 7.9 6.7 6.9 Rural others 20.5 19.5 34.4 37.5 32.0 Urban self-employed 21.6 13.3 19.7 30.9 24.1 Urban regular earning 23.3 24.0 30.8 41.0 33.8 Urban casual labour 9.0 12.2 7.6 5.3 8.4 Urban others 65.1 60.7 69.2 78.9 73.6 Total 7.7 11.6 14.7 26.8 17.2 Source: NSSO Participation and Expenditure in Education 2007-08 69 Table 23: Percentage distribution of students in Higher Education by institution type in each social group and location in 2007-08 Social Groups Government Local body Private aide Private un-a Not known Total Rural ST 55.2 0.0 23.7 19.0 2.1 100.0 SC 53.5 0.7 27.1 16.7 2.1 100.0 OBC 40.2 0.7 31.9 25.9 1.4 100.0 Others 50.9 1.1 28.4 18.5 1.1 100.0 Total 47.0 0.8 29.4 21.3 1.4 100.0 Urban ST 59.8 2.1 18.2 19.8 0.1 100.0 SC 50.1 1.2 36.3 11.7 0.8 100.0 OBC 42.4 1.6 29.4 25.2 1.5 100.0 Others 46.4 1.3 26.8 23.8 1.7 100.0 Total 46.0 1.4 28.4 22.7 1.5 100.0 Rural + Urban ST 57.3 1.0 21.2 19.3 1.2 100.0 SC 51.8 0.9 31.4 14.3 1.5 100.0 OBC 41.3 1.1 30.7 25.5 1.4 100.0 Others 47.9 1.2 27.3 22.0 1.5 100.0 Total 46.4 1.1 28.9 22.1 1.4 100.0 Source: NSSO Participation and Expenditure in Education 2007-08 70 ures: X. Annexu A 1. Const titution of STs and d Persons f a Nationa al Monitor with Disa abilities (P 71 mittee ring Comm for PwDs) n Education of SCs, 72 73 mmittee 2. Constit tution of a a Sub-Com fo TSP 74 g or Drafting of Guide SCSP lines for S and 75 3. Na ational Adv visory Coun ncil Recomm 76 mendations on reformin ng SCSP/TS SP 77 78 28th May, 2012 1. Draft Recommendations containing Essential Elements of the Implementation Framework of Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP) by NAC working group NAC Working Group on Dalit Issues Draft Recommendations containing Essential Elements of the Implementation Framework of Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP) 1. Background: 1.1 An important initiative in closing the gap between the SCs and the rest is the concept of Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP). This strategy purports to direct plan resources to accelerate the pace of development of SCs so that the gaps in development of SCs when compared to others is bridged at the earliest. SCSP is therefore an instrument for fulfilling the objectives of inclusive growth in India. Its implementation, however, has been deficient both in the States, and the Centre. This was clearly stated in the Planning commission’s approach paper to 12th Plan 1.2 The NAC also was of the view that a new system must be devised for the 12th Plan which can overcome the difficulties experienced in the past and ensure that the sub Plans are implemented in letter and spirit and made its recommendations to the Government in December, 2011. 2. Reform Experience has shown that existing guidelines of the Planning Commission which have been communicated to both the central Ministries and to States, have not yielded the desired results, barring few States who have attempted to achieve some progress in recent years. The consultations clearly brought out the imperative need for issue of a fresh set of guidelines, with clearly laid out planning processes, monitoring and evaluation of outcomes. 3. Way forward Therefore, in continuation of its recommendations made in December, 2011, NAC looked at the elements of such implementation framework. It was initially envisaged that a central legislation would be an ideal mechanism to institutionalize the planning process and ensure accountability at all levels for effective implementation of the Sub-Plan. Comments of the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Ministry of Tribal Affairs and the Planning Commission were obtained in this regard. Based on comments received as well as suggestions given by other Members of the NAC, it was felt that while a central legislation may prima facie be desirable, for the present, what is required is a fresh set of guidelines and effective implementation mechanism, backed up by consistent monitoring and evaluation of outcomes. The Working Group of NAC on Dalit Issues has therefore now enunciated a set of Essential Elements for the Implementation Framework of SCSP (Annexure I), in line with the NAC recommendations made earlier (Annexure II), and recommends issue of fresh guidelines by the Planning Commission incorporating them. 79 Draft Essential Elements of the Implementation Framework of Scheduled Caste Sub-Plan 1. Objectives of the Scheduled Castes Sub-Plan (SCSP) Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP) refers to a policy to channelize a proportion of the population, which should be set apart as Scheduled Caste Sub-Plan (SCSP), before the Plan outlays are allocated to the Departments. The objective is to accelerate the development of SCs, so as to bridge the gaps in the development indicators between SCs and other socially advanced classes, by securing to the SCs, reduction in poverty and unemployment; creation of productive assets and income generating opportunities; human resource development by enhancing their access to education and health services; enhancing quality of life by providing basic amenities in SC localities including housing. 2. Institutional support for SCSP Following is the institutional architecture that is proposed for effective implementation of SCSP: Central Government 2.1 A permanent Cabinet Committee on Development of Scheduled Castes to be set up to review and guide effective implementation of SCSP. This Committee may be chaired by Prime Minister. 2.2 The present Central Tripartite Committee (CTC) in the Planning Commission to be replaced with a new High Level Committee (HLC) consisting of the Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission, Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment, besides Memberin-charge, Planning Commission and Chairperson, National Commission for Scheduled Castes to review the implementation of SCSP and to resolve various policy related issues thereto. 2.3 A separate unit to be created in the Planning Commission under a Principal Advisor for SCSP with adequate staff to appraise the Annual SCSP Plans of central ministries, finalize the allocations and to evaluate the outcomes at the end of the financial year. This unit shall also be the Secretariat for the HLC in the Planning Commission. 2.4 In the central ministries, a dedicated nodal unit to be headed by a Joint Secretary or Economic Advisor with full time support staff with the responsibility of preparation of Annual SCSP Plans, and also to monitor their subsequent implementation. 2.5 The National Commission for Scheduled Castes to be strengthened with adequate professional expertise and provided with supporting manpower to undertake independent evaluation of SCSP schemes of the central ministries and to give feedback to the central ministries. The National Commission for Scheduled Castes can also recommend schemes which have the potential of addressing the development needs of SCs to the concerned central ministries for inclusion in their Annual SCSP Plans. 80