dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  1  Table of Contents  FOREWORD 2  1. The Idea of A University 8  2. Challenges of the Higher Education Sector 11  2.1 Distances and Disconnects  2.1.1 Invisible walls 2.1.2 Divide between research bodies and universities 2.1.3 Isolation of IITs and IIMs 2.1.4 Erosion of democratic space  2.2 Architecture of learning 16  2.2.2 Learning across disciplines 2.2.3 Teacher education 2.2.4 Rehabilitating professional education in the university 2.2.5 Undermining undergraduate education 2.2.6 Performance criteria  2.3 Structures, Expansion and Access 28  2.3.1 State universities and affiliated colleges 2.3.2 Growth of private-commercial providers 2.3.3 Mushrooming of ‘deemed’ universities 2.3.4 Issues of affordability 2.3.5 Foreign universities 2.3.6 Resource management and financing  2.4 Governance and Autonomy 43  2.4.1 Poor governance of universities 2.4.2 Interference in university functioning: Loss of autonomy 2.4.3 Subversion from within  2.5 Multiplicity of Regulatory Systems 48  3. Recovering the idea of the University: A Roadmap 52  3.1 A New Regulatory Framework 3.2 Objectives of ‘The National Commission for Higher Education  and Researc’h 3.3 Restructuring Universities 3.4 Agenda for Action  Appendix A : Role of The National Commission for Higher Education and Research 63 B : Draft for according Constitutional status to the  proposed National Commission for Higher Education and Research 67 C : Documents related to evolution of the work of the Committee. 71  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  2  FOREWORD  It is a pleasure to present the report of the “Committee to Advise on the  Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education”. This has been a deep  immersion for my colleagues and me. We hope that we have come out with  something that would make a difference. To give you some background of  our work, it would be best if I start by quoting from the letter I wrote to the  then Minister of Human Resource Development, Shri Arjun Singh, while  forwarding our Draft Report on 1st of March, 2009:  “I am submitting the Draft Interim Report of the Committee you had set up  through a Notification on 28th of February 2008. You had given us a year.  The committee was originally supposed to review UGC/AICTE and various  other Councils connected with higher education. The expressed, and the  overall implied, hope was that we might be able to suggest ways of moving  our higher education to a more active and creative form. I felt that engaging  with listing the limitations and faults of these two organizations would not  be very productive, besides being very limiting. We did not want to expend  our energies in suggesting minor and major modifications in their  structures; instead we decided to explore some basic aberrations in our  system that are generally ignored. Therefore, a few months down the line I  came to you to suggest that our task might be made broader; that we should  be asked to advise on “Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education”. I  was both pleased and overwhelmed that you conceded to my request. As you  would notice, the salient points of our report also meet the essence of the  earlier, more limited, task given to us.  We were struck by the fact that over the years we have followed policies of  fragmenting our educational enterprise into cubicles. We have overlooked  that new knowledge and new insights have often originated at the  boundaries of disciplines. We have tended to imprison disciplinary studies in  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  3  opaque walls. This has restricted flights of imagination and limited our  creativity. This character of our education has restrained and restricted our  young right from the school age and continues that way into college and  university stages. Most instrumentalities of our education harm the potential  of human mind for constructing and creating new knowledge. We have  emphasized delivery of information and rewarded capability of storing  information. This does not help in creating a knowledge society. This is  particularly vile at the university level because one of the requirements of a  good university should be to engage in knowledge creation – not just for the  learner but also for society as a whole.  It became clear to us, therefore, that the overall regulating structure for all  higher education should be just one. This would imply that the UGC and  AICTE should be subsumed within a single Higher Education Commission.  There is no need for separate Councils for various areas and the  responsibilities of various existing Councils should be changed to define the  floor-exit qualifications of personnel who exit from the respective  institutions. Knowledge and curricular details would be determined by  appropriate universities under guidelines of appropriate structures set up by  various wings of Higher Education Commission. Some details about the  structure of the Higher Education Commission (HEC), various bodies  attached to it and other aspects are discussed in the report. (It might be  noted that the justification and role of the suggested HEC are different from  those proposed by the Knowledge Commission). We hope the Commission  proposed by us would also act as a facilitator and catalyst for joint programs  between different Universities and other institutions.  Let me point to some of the recommendations that have arisen from this way  of thinking. Our report comes at a time when there is a refreshing  seriousness about doing some thing ambitious and unprecedented in our  higher education. A large number of Central universities are being set up.  Also several Institutes of Technology, Management and other areas. During a  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  4  lot of discussion in this regard we have also talked of World-Class  Universities. We would like to point out that there are no great universities  in the world that do not simultaneously conduct world class programs in  science, astronomy, management, languages, comparative literature,  philosophy, psychology, information technology, law, political science,  economics, agriculture and many other emerging disciplines. Indeed the  emerging disciplines do their emerging because of infection or triggering by  other fields in the same university. That is the reason that such universities  are so great and our academics keep going to them. Our argument is that  they would not be great if they could not accommodate people from many  other disciplines. Put together, all the disciplines, breed value into each  other. If forced to stay in isolation from each other they would not have the  character demanded for greatness. It is our strong recommendation that the  new Universities, including those we call Indian Institutes of Technology – or  Management should have the character of such world-class universities.  Furthermore, the existing Institutes of Technology whose competence as  excellent undergraduate institutions we do recognize (also their brand name)  should be challenged to play a bigger role – for example similar to that of  great universities like the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) or  Caltech. In addition, like these great universities of the world they should  engage with a much wider universe of knowledge, both at undergraduate  and post graduate levels.  We are also convinced that Indian higher education as a whole cannot go far  without our paying equal attention to the State universities. They are also  Indian universities and a large fraction our students will continue to come  from them. Many of them are as good as our Central institutions and should  be given a chance to fly. We should think seriously about the manner in  which the motivation and resources are enhanced all over the country.  I would like to mention our deep concern in respect of two matters.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  5  Mushrooming engineering and management colleges, with some notable  exceptions, have largely become, mere business entities dispensing very poor  quality education. We have made some recommendations in this regard.  Deemed Universities have also mushroomed. Most of them do not belong to  the same class as those recognized as such twenty years ago. This provision  was reserved for a few truly outstanding education and research institutions,  with a consideration that they would bring depth and variety into the  education system. We are seriously concerned about the character and value  of the recent explosive growth and have made specific recommendations in  this regard.  Finally, we would share with you the prevalent feeling in the universities that  there is too much inspection, interference and delay in their dealings with  State and Central Governments. I am sure universities and colleges should  themselves share some blame in this regard, but we need to move away from  this blame game. We have to devise somewhat different, more efficient,  funding management system. We have made some recommendations in this  regard. We would recommend that universities should become self-  regulating partners in managing the overall education system. Continuous  monitoring and inspection cause delays and lead to corruption. Some  suggestions in this regard have also been made.”  You would notice that we are placing supreme importance on the character  of universities. They must create new knowledge. Besides making people  capable of creating wealth they have a deep role in the overall thinking of  society and the world as a whole. This job cannot be performed in secluded  corners of information and knowledge. It would be silly to deny the practical  role of experts in areas of science, technology, economics, finance and  management. But narrow expertise alone does not make educated human  beings for tomorrow. Indeed, speaking more seriously, one could almost say  that most serious problems of the world today arise from the fact that we are  dominated by striations of expertise with deep chasms in between.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  6  A year and some months after we started I feel that I have been engaged in a  movement in which there has been lot of thinking and an enormous amount  of sharing. We did have several meetings in proper meeting rooms, but we  also had open interaction with close to a thousand Vice-Chancellors,  Principals of Colleges and teachers. In addition, in most places we visited  there was interaction with large groups, school and college students. For me  meetings with children are always energizing because they are not yet fully  imprisoned in disciplines. After all this I have been left with a deep feeling of  optimism. Hidden in small places, in obscure schools, colleges and  universities, there are potential geniuses to be discovered. Many of them  could be the great knowledge creators of tomorrow. We have to discover and  implement ways that would not put useless hurdles in their path. That is  our challenge. I do not propose to go over every thing that has been said in  our report. But a few essential might be worth repeating:  We have suggested that the present regulating bodies should all be  subsumed within a National Commission for Higher Education and Research  (NCHER).  To reduce most possibilities of interference this Commission should be  established through a Constitutional amendment and have a Constitutional  status.  A suggested provision to be inserted appropriately in the Constitution  through an amendment is annexed with the Report.  NCHER has not been visualised as a Czar. The autonomy of universities is to  be respected and we should not enforce dead uniformity. They do not have to  be carbon copies of each other.  Quite a few suggestions have been made to improve the method of  appointment of Vice-Chancellors and internal working of universities.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  7  To highlight our suggestions for the management system within a University  it has been suggested that our best run institutions, in ascending order  might be some of the Central Universities, IITs and IIMs. They might show  the way to others.  Stand-alone single discipline institutions should try to broaden themselves  to provide a more wholesome education to their students and thus qualify  for the title of a degree giving university.  We have addressed the question of public private partnership appropriately,  welcoming a proper movement in this direction.  And a lot of other matters, such as the question of affiliated colleges, have  been discussed at length. We have been conscious of the fact that our  committee should not try to do the job of the proposed NCHER.  But I do reserve the right to add that in order to enrich our higher education  we might invite from abroad a substantial number of potentially great  academics and scientists to work with our students and teachers, instead of  importing mediocre foreign universities to set up shop here.  I also want to express my deep appreciation of the fact that Shri Arjun Singh  sensed the value of what we were trying to do, when I went to him with a  request to change the name and charge of our Committee after two months  of deep collective thinking.  I would also like to disclose that before I agreed to get involved with this  work, I had a conversation with the Prime Minister and got the impression  that some out of the box thinking might not be frowned upon. Indeed, it was  expected. Perhaps we have done a bit of that.  A few words with Shri Kapil Sibal, after he agreed to steer the MHRD also  assured me that some real resonance might be around the corner!  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  8  I think this is more than enough for a Foreword. I want to personally thank  every one who has contributed to this unique effort and given so much of  their time and talent. It has been a rare privilege to be given the chance of  spending so much time with my distinguished colleagues. I assure you all  that, whatever the fate of your Report, your work will have a meaning for our  future.  Yash Pal  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  9  1. THE IDEA OF A UNIVERSITY  A university is a place where new ideas germinate, strike roots and grow tall  and sturdy. It is a unique space, which covers the entire universe of  knowledge. It is a place where creative minds converge, interact with each  other and construct visions of new realities. Established notions of truth are  challenged in the pursuit of knowledge.  To be able to do all this, universities have to be autonomous spaces. They  are diverse in their design and organization, reflecting the unique historical  and socio-cultural settings in which they have grown. This diversity reflects  the organic links that they have with their surroundings, which are not only  physical but cultural as well. Through research and teaching, they create,  evaluate and bring about advances in knowledge and culture. The principle  of moral and intellectual autonomy from political authority and economic  power is ingrained in the very idea of the university. This autonomy ensures  freedom in research and training and it is expected that the governments  and the society would respect this fundamental principle. Teaching and  research have to be inseparable, because the task of the university is not  only to impart knowledge to young people but also to give them opportunities  to create their own knowledge. Active and constant engagement with the  young minds and hearts of the society also implies that the universities are  to serve the society as a whole, and in order to achieve this, considerable  investment in continuing education is essential.  The slow but increasing democratization of higher education in India has  meant that the university is no longer the preserve of the children of the  elite, or of the educated/professional middle-class. As more youngsters from  a different segment of society enter the universities, they look at higher  education as a means to transcend the class barriers. Consequently,  university education is no longer viewed as a good in itself, but also as the  stepping-stone into a higher orbit of the job market, where the student  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  10  expects a concrete monetary return, and consequently in this perception, the  university of today is expected to be in tune with the emerging needs of the  society. Even so, graduates should be sufficiently exposed to  interdisciplinary experiences, which can sustain them when the demands of  a particular job market changes.  The university has also been regarded as the trustee of the humanist  traditions of the world and it constantly endeavors to fulfill its mission by  attaining universal knowledge, which can be done only by transcending  geographical, cultural and political boundaries. By doing so, it affirms the  need for all cultures to know each other and keeps alive the possibilities of  dialogue among them. It is also important to remember that the university  aims to develop a scholarly and scientific outlook. This outlook involves the  ability to set aside special interests for the sake of impartial analysis.  Standing for more than specific factual knowledge, a scientific outlook calls  for an analytical and questioning attitude and the continuous exercise of  reason. All this requires us to go beyond specialized knowledge and  competence. This universal approach to knowledge demands that  boundaries of disciplines be porous and scholars be constantly on guard  against the tendency towards ‘cubicalization’ of knowledge.  Apart from resisting fragmentation of knowledge, the idea of a university  should at the same time aspire to encompass the world of work in all its  forms. Work constitutes the human sphere where knowledge and skills are  born, and where new knowledge takes shape in response to social and  personal needs. Indeed, the experience and culture of work represents that  core space where the humanities and the sciences meet.  The founders of the Indian Republic, with these essential features of a  university at the back of their minds, realized even during the freedom  struggle that the future of Indian democracy depended largely on the ability  of the society to create new knowledge. The enrichment and development of  cultural, scientific and technical resources was to be done in centres of  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  11  culture, knowledge and research, as represented by true universities. These  expectations were to be fulfilled in a social context characterized by a sharp  division between the rural and the urban, the elite and the masses, and  between men and women. Since a university is based on the fundamental  principle of transcendence and meeting of minds from diverse backgrounds,  higher education was increasingly perceived as a means to overcome caste  and class hierarchy, patriarchy and other cultural prejudices and also a  source of new knowledge and skills, a space for creativity and innovations.  Higher education, therefore, was and continues to be considered a national  responsibility and the state has to make necessary provisions to realize its  potentials.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  12  2. CHALLENGES OF THE HIGHER EDUCATION SECTOR  Loss of primacy of the universities in the scheme of the higher education  sector in India, erosion of their autonomy, undermining of undergraduate  education, the growing distance between knowledge areas and the isolation  of universities from the real world outside and crass commercialization are  some of the problems that characterise the growth of the Indian higher  education system. It is important that we develop an understanding of these  issues before suggesting strategies to renovate and rejuvenate higher  education in India.  2.1 DISTANCES AND DISCONNECTS  2.1.1 Invisible walls  It is often pointed out that our undergraduate and graduate  programmes are too ‘theoretical’, the implication being that they  are devoid of ‘practical’ experiences. Without going into familiar  epistemological issues, we can say that a theory is as good as  the power it has to explain the world. A theory is put to practice  when a student attempts to use it to make sense of what she  notices in the world. Conversely, by noticing something in the  world and seeking an explanation for it, a student feels the need  to have a theory.  The chasm that exists between theory and practice combined  with the fragmentation of the idea of knowledge leads to the  confusion that our system of higher education is suffering from.  To overcome this, it would be necessary that the universities  adopt a curricular approach which treats knowledge in a holistic  manner and creates exciting opportunities for different kinds of  interfaces between the disciplines, which is unthinkable today in  most of the universities and institutions of higher learning. It is  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  13  important that universities relate to the world outside and the  walls of disciplines are porous enough to let other voices be  heard. It would also be necessary that the university education  is seen in its totality and subject areas not be designed in  isolation.  The Indian system of higher education has also kept itself aloof  from the local knowledge base of the worker, the artisan and the  peasant. It has kept itself at a distance from the real world  outside. Within the system, there are distances between  disciplines. Within a single campus, disciplines often grow in  complete ignorance even of each other’s presence.  This lack of dialogue becomes more profound when we talk of  areas like engineering, medicine and teacher training. Here, we  have ended up with statutory bodies, which exist purely for the  task of regulation. While universities award engineering and  medical degrees, it is ironic that they do not have the powers to  determine whether an institution that claims to train engineers  or doctors has the wherewithal to do so. Nor do they have  sufficient say in designing the academic programmes, in  professional disciplines, as these are largely influenced by  statutory bodies like the Medical Council of India and the AICTE.  Ostensibly, the university’s loss of academic influence in this  respect looks like a case of distribution of responsibilities. Yet, at  its heart lie the erosion of university’s concept of knowledge, and  perpetuation of a divisive view of knowledge and skill.  2.1.2 Divide between Research Bodies and Universities  Universities were historically conceived as spaces where teaching  and research go together. They are closely linked. Research and  teaching are simply different aspects of academic work. To teach  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  14  effectively at the university level, one needs to actively engage in  research. This was not questioned when only a small section of  the elite had access to the universities and when university  research was comparatively inexpensive. It seemed proper (and  feasible) for undergraduates to be taught by people who were  actively engaged in research and scholarship. Now, when  universities have become mass institutions and costs of  research, especially in the context of science and engineering,  have become very high, things have changed.  Over the years, there has been an increasing tendency to treat  teaching and research as separate activities, although for very  different reasons, with some wishing to preserve research as élite  activity. This distinction is being reinforced by separate policies,  programmes and structures.  This disjoint between teaching and research has led to a  situation in which, on the one hand, most of the universities  have been reduced to the status of centres that teach and  examine masses and, on the other hand, more and more elite  research bodies are being created where researchers have  absolutely no occasion to engage with young minds.  It should be necessary for all research bodies to connect with  universities in their vicinity and create teaching opportunities for  their researchers and for all universities to be teaching and  research universities  2.1.3 Isolation of IITs and IIMs  The IITs and IIMs are considered to be bright spots in the  otherwise dismal scenario of higher education in India. There is  little dispute over their claim to quality and excellence. They  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  15  have also fiercely and successfully defended their autonomy over  the years.  IITs and IIMs were created in the first phases of nation building,  and kept out of the traditional university structure to give them  free play to be able to help the nation have a pool of excellent  engineering and managerial talent. To a fair extent, these  institutions have succeeded.  Looking at the enormous potential they have, it has been felt  that they must strive to be models of all-round excellence, like  the famous Massachusetts Institute of Technology or CALTECH  in the US. This requires rethinking to prevent isolation of the  study of engineering and management from other knowledge  areas. This realization is reflected in the initiatives of some of the  IITs that aim to introduce humanities and other disciplines and  expand their scope. These initiatives strengthen our argument  that they need to broaden their curriculum framework and  assume the functions of full-fledged universities without losing  their unique character. We can then look forward to the day  when IITs and IIMs would be producing scholars in literature,  linguistics and politics along with engineering and management  wizards who would have substantial motivation for engagement  with the local community, and the opportunity to use and  enhance learning by solving real-life problems in their immediate  environment. While working towards this goal we need to  understand that different IITs and IIMs would have different  strategies to expand and diversify, and we must refrain from  issuing a uniform diktat to all of them to move in a prescribed  direction.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  16  2.1.4 Erosion of democratic space  The role of higher education in creating an institutional space for  dialogue and liberal inquiry is well recognized, but it is seldom  appreciated in the context of establishing norms of democratic  behaviour and exchange. In India, where social hierarchy and  divisions are sharp, institutions of learning serve as sites where  powerful social forces vie for dominance. The institutional  capacity to maintain peace and a democratic process plays a  critical role in shaping the ethos of this site. Peace in this  context can be described as a pre-condition for rationally  organized dialogue between contending forces, ideologies and  viewpoints. If institutions of higher education fail to ensure  peace on their own premises in this sense of the term,  they cannot avoid failing in a far greater sense when they  claim public money on a gigantic scale and lose public faith.  For a considerable length of time following Independence,  institutions of higher learning succeeded in providing a space  where dialogue between rival social forces and ideologies could  take place in a peaceful atmosphere. However, over the last few  decades certain distinct signs of the erosion of this space have  surfaced quite often in different parts of the country. The  situation has worsened over the last few years. Not only  organized youth but the official machinery of the university has  been deliberately used to obstruct or subvert the possibility of  peaceful debate and inquiry resulting in a long-term institutional  damage to their capacity to serve as sites of peace. This is a  matter of great anxiety, not just because it marks the erosion of  institutional sanctity, but also because it distorts the idea of a  university and its role in the creation of knowledge by free and  open inquiry through research and dialogue.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  17  The issue of geo-cultural diversities is another critical area  where our universities have increasingly failed to act as spaces  where students would learn to respect diversity as a value. In a  world where boundaries are blurring, it is important that we  learn to acknowledge and appreciate differences and not try to  homogenize everything.  2.2 ARCHITECTURE OF LEARNING  Currently, many students passing out from institutions of higher  education do so without obtaining the kind of skills they really need to  work in a real-world environment. Among the drawbacks many  students face are lack of ability to analyze or solve problems, relate  problems to different contexts, communicate clearly and have an  integrated understanding of different branches of knowledge.  These problems can be addressed if the processes by which curriculum  is designed and then syllabi are determined undergo improvement.  2.2.1 Curriculum issues and syllabus-making  There is a need to ask as to what is the purpose of a university,  especially at the undergraduate level, and then use the answers  to develop a curriculum.  At present, the design of curriculum and syllabi is reflective of  the entrenched examination system under which the student is  asked to face a question paper at the end of the year, or in some  universities, at the end of the semester. This archaic  examination system, ostensibly used as a means of certifying the  ability of students, unfortunately does not really test the kind of  skills they require to be successful in either the pursuit of pure  theoretical knowledge or in practical real world situations.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  18  The examination system, even in the case of the relatively better  equipped and less rigid institutions, has remained quite  manifestly traditional and incapable of distinguishing between  different talents of students in a reliable manner. Similar to what  happens at the school level, university-level evaluation practices  also simply broaden the scope of memory-based questioning,  with the occasional rote-based ‘application’ question  masquerading as real-world problem solving. In doing so, they  entrench the student’s lack of ability to examine and understand  the real world, as a result of which their engagement with people  or issues remains scarce once they enter the world of work, with  implications for their abilities as workers and citizens.  As a result of this lopsided emphasis on evaluation of students  through examinations, what is considered knowledge in the  prevailing setup is at best a body of facts. This occasionally leads  to students gaining ‘knowledge’ with varying, though usually  low, degrees of success.  The mode of transmission is also generally quite poor in terms of  its pedagogic quality. The methods of teaching and evaluation  used are not conducive to improving the ability of students for  abstract thinking.  If the syllabi were to be designed with a view to inducting the  student into a community of participant citizens, a new kind of  institutional culture and ethos can be created in our general and  professional colleges. For this to happen, all syllabi should  require the teachers and students to apply what they have learnt  in their courses, on studying a local situation, issue or problem.  There should be sufficient room for the use of local data and  resources to make the knowledge covered in the syllabus come  alive as experience.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  19  This is required simply because engaging with the world  surrounding us – both local and international- is an important  aspect of learning, both as a means as well as an end.  Knowledge- both theoretical and applied- when pursued with  reference to the milieu is qualitatively different from knowledge,  which is pursued in isolation from the surroundings. The  difference becomes apparent both in the depth to which the  acquisition of knowledge shapes the learner’s mind and  personality, as well as in the nature and productivity of the  relationship between the learner and the teacher.  Exposing students to the world of work plays two related and  essential roles. First, by helping them to understand the reality  of different kinds of work, and those who perform this work,  ranging from manual labour to intellectual tasks, it sensitizes  them to the conditions of a universe of persons outside of their  own. Second, it allows them to apply what they have learnt in  the classroom to real-world situations, and in doing so not only  makes them better prepared for their own entry into the world of  employment or academic research, but also strengthens their  understanding of the underlying concepts they are supposed to  have learned.  Curricular reform in this regard would include compulsory  exposure and engagement with different kinds of work, in the  form of summer jobs or internships, according to the  circumstances and surroundings of the particular university,  and should include both manual and other kinds of  work/occupations, with a certain minimum set of occupational  exposure compulsory for all students, irrespective of discipline.  Evaluating students on these fronts would necessarily have to  analyse how well they have understood, and are as a result  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  20  capable of applying themselves to work and be problem-solving  in these situations.  Examples of this process of syllabus designing will need to be  worked out in different disciplines, since an engineering or  science course will clearly engage with local matters differently  from history or political science. For this strategy of syllabus  redesigning to succeed, evaluation and examination practices  will also have to change, and certainly, there will have to be a  change in pedagogic practices used by teachers.  2.2.2 Learning across disciplines  At present, much of our higher education is uni-disciplinary or  within a narrow spread. Specialization in a given discipline is  only valuable in so far as it allows the learner to link that  discipline with the real world and contextualize his/her own  conceptions of life and its various phenomena.  Wherever education does involve inclusion of disciplines other  than the major one that the student is studying, it is in the form  of ‘subsidiary’ subjects. By their very nomenclature these  subjects are seldom regarded as serious, either for the  assessment they carry, or, least of all, for their content.  Likewise, the teaching and syllabi of these subjects, over a  period of time, also become poor in quality and motivation.  Hence, currently despite going through the motions there is no  real learning across disciplines happening.  Contextually understanding a particular subject or discipline,  and applying its concepts to worldly questions is an  acknowledged aim of education, particularly at the higher levels  such as undergraduate education. Integrating a given subject to  which the student devotes a majority of her/his time with other  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  21  relevant subjects is therefore essential to improve the current  undergraduate education structure.  One way of improving the quality of teaching of these additional  disciplines and stimulating students’ interest is to allow  students for whom a subject is additional to study along with  those for whom the same subject is primary. For instance, a  mathematics student should study and undergo evaluation in  philosophy as an optional subject along with students for whom  philosophy constitutes the primary subject.  In sum, there is a need to expose students, especially at the  undergraduate level, to various disciplines like humanities,  social sciences, aesthetics etc., in an integrated manner. This  should be irrespective of the discipline they would like to  specialize in subsequently.  2.2.3 Teacher education  The preparation of teachers for all levels of school education  should be the responsibility of One exception to this general picture is the  institutions of higher education. Bachelor of Elementary Education (B.El.Ed.)  For historical reasons, the course of the University of Delhi. The success of  involvement of universities in  this course in establishing a benchmark of  school-level teacher education has  quality indicates how necessary it is to recognize  been confined to secondary and  teacher education – for all stages of school  senior secondary-level school -  education – as a sector of higher education. The  rationale for such a move is self-evident.  teachers' pre-service training under  the B.Ed. degree programme. The  State governments manage the Irrespective of the level at which a teacher serves,  preparation of teachers for the he or she deals with knowledge. Higher  primary and pre-primary levels. education is where knowledge is produced and  Although these levels have been therefore it makes sense to regard teacher  education as a whole as a sector of higher  education.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  22  recognized as being fundamental to the development of children  and the nation, the absence of university-level interest has  resulted in poor academic quality.  It is also necessary to enhance the quality of teacher education  within higher education. At present, Academic Staff Colleges are  serving to provide refresher courses required by faculty  to acquire eligibility for promotion. While this role is important,  the manner in which it is being fulfilled is far from satisfactory.  It is necessary to develop full-fledged orientation programmes for  newly recruited teachers in colleges and universities. Such  courses should orient teachers towards the proposed curriculum  framework as well as to impart communication and assessment  skills.  2.2.4 Rehabilitating professional education in the university  Substantial damage has been done to universities and  institutions of professional education by their separation from  each other. The pursuit of engineering and medicine, in  particular, in colleges or institutes, which exist like islands, has  come at an incalculable social and cultural cost. Seventeen-year-  olds who move from a higher secondary school straight into an  engineering or medical college, and who thereby have no means  to gain exposure to any in-depth knowledge of society, its  economy, politics and culture, while possibly becoming excellent  engineers and doctors in a very restricted sense also have as  much potential to become an impediment to holistic social  development.  In the context of medicine, this matter has received some  attention in a few exceptional institutions, but as institutions of  professional education, medical colleges in general have evolved  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  23  in isolation from the rest of the university, with the latter acting  merely as a degree-granting or certification authority.  Conversely, there is also a trend for creation of stand-alone  universities in certain fields, such as agriculture, medicine and  law. While there has been a need for providing depth in  specialization in specific knowledge areas, this process has been  trivialized and has now deteriorated to such an extent that  universities are being created for narrow areas like information  technology, pharmacy, catering, yoga, music and fashion  technology.  In order to provide the graduates of these specialized institutions  with a holistic curriculum including other relevant branches of  knowledge , it would be necessary that their curriculum  framework is so designed that they could work in partnership  with other institutions in their vicinity. Instead of making any  prescription in this regard the committee proposes that these  institutions should evolve creative ways of engaging with diverse  range of knowledge areas.  In order to build strong epistemic bridges between different fields  of professional education and the different disciplines of science,  social sciences, and humanities, it is necessary that professional  institutions are returned to universities in a complete  administrative and academic sense by the abolition of  intermediary bodies set up to issue licenses to professional  colleges alone, and to inspect them. Such a measure will open  the possibility of new kinds of course-designing for professional  learning in all fields from management and architecture to  medicine and engineering, along the lines indicated in other  sections of this report.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  24  The vocational education sector is at present outside the purview  of universities and colleges. The knowledge and skills covered by  this sector have no linkages with institutions of higher education  and research. Students who go for vocational and technical  education after completing higher secondary education are  deprived of any possibility of pursuing higher education after  completing their vocational or technical training. Alienation of  this sector can be overcome by bringing it under the purview of  universities and by providing necessary accreditation to the  courses available in polytechnics, industrial training  institutions, and so on. In the context of the rural economy and  livelihoods, certain institutions and programmes have attempted  to provide opportunities for There is a trend of granting university status to  further education after the higher  major organizations such as CSIR, ISRO etc.  secondary stage. They also need  The basis for this trend is to provide  to be brought under the purview  opportunities to various laboratories under such  of the university system. Such  organizations to utilize their facilities and  expertise to provide degree level programmers in  incorporation will create the  possibility of addressing long-  neglected issues of social justice their fields of specialization. This approach needs  and inequity arising out of the to be reconsidered. Laboratories can offer degree  hierarchical social order and level programs of a holistic nature in association  entrenched rural-urban with other institutions and can be recognized as  disparities.  universities. However, the organizations or  The reason why vocational departments themselves should not be treated as  education has remained under- universities.  developed and continues to be  perceived as a last option is  because it is largely the poor, who  either cannot afford academic education or who pass out of  poorly-equipped and uninspiring schools with low marks. This  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  25  kind of stigmatization of vocational education, as a last resort  and essentially for the poorer sections of society, needs to be  overcome for speedy development of the skills necessary in the  present phase of India's economic development. The setting up  of a skill-development council at the Central level is a positive  step in this direction. Further growth will greatly depend on the  guidance and leadership that universities will be able to provide  for institutions of vocational and technical education, once they  are brought into the domain an all-encompassing system of  higher education.  Additionally the barriers to entry into universities for students  going through vocational training should be lowered to enable  them to upgrade their knowledge base at any stage of their  careers.  2.2.5 Undermining undergraduate education  The years following school education form the most important  stage of induction into adult life, including academic life and  employment. In our country, the undergraduate years have  mostly remained in the precinct of affiliated colleges, i.e., not as  part of mainstream university life. Indeed, quite a few  universities do not have undergraduate classes at all. In many  universities, the faculty serving undergraduate colleges is given  some opportunity to participate in postgraduate teaching at the  university, but there is no such provision for the university  faculty to serve in colleges. This arrangement illustrates the  perceived hierarchy of the UG and PG stages of higher  education. In treating UG education as a ‘lower’ level of learning,  the Indian university system has perpetuated a source of its own  intellectual malnourishment. It is the younger student studying  in UG classes who is in the best position to raise basic questions  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  26  on a host of issues while participating in the entrenched  discourses of various disciplines. By not exposing itself to UG-  level teaching, university faculty, especially the senior faculty,  deprives itself of a rejuvenating pedagogic experience. In all the  great universities of the world we know of, great teachers, even  Nobel Laureates, prefer to teach undergraduate students.  It should be mandatory for all universities to have a rich  undergraduate programme and undergraduate students must  get opportunities to interact with the best faculty. While  appointing teachers to the universities their affiliation to a  particular college should also be specified to emphasize the need  for their exposure to undergraduate students.  2.2.6 Performance Criteria  Setting up of certain performance criteria is a common device for  infusing accountability in an organization. Such a device is  particularly useful for institutions, which are expected to work in  an autonomous manner. Even as we endorse the principle of full  autonomy for a university, we recognize the need to evolve  certain performance criteria on the basis of which universities  can assess themselves and can be assessed by others in a  transparent manner.  The current environment favors those criteria which can  generate enumerative data, such as the number of research  papers published by the faculty in journals, the number of  patents acquired, and so on. Criteria of this kind are convenient  to use, but often end up becoming mechanical and lose their  significance in the context of larger aims of education when the  faculty’s work gets delinked from national or social concerns and  priorities. Taking a cautionary view towards such a possibility,  we propose three parameters for evolving performance criteria.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  27  These are: one, socio-cultural aims of higher education; two,  academic excellence; and three, institutional self-reform.  The Constitution of India offers a framework for aims of  education. The socio-cultural aims enshrined in the Constitution  assign a transformative role to education. Therefore, in the first  parameter we suggest the application of criteria, which derive  their value from the categories in terms of which the inequality  and social injustice prevailing in Indian society are commonly  understood and expressed. Gender is the first and foremost  category of this kind. The higher education system offers  pervasive instances of gender asymmetry. Perhaps no instances  are as glaring as the ones we see in our best institutions of  technology and management, but the situation is quite grim in  several other domains, especially if we extend the scope of our  enquiry to cover the composition of the faculty at the highest  levels and administrative positions like that of the Vice-  Chancellor. Caste and economic class are two other categories  on the basis of which a university’s performance can be assessed  by asking what steps it has taken to reduce gender, caste and  class asymmetries, the modality of such steps, and their  outcomes. In the composition of the faculty, the representation  of regions other than the one in which a university is located can  serve as a valuable means of assessing a university’s resolve to  avoid the parochial tendencies we commonly notice. By  definition, a university is a place where India’s diversity must  find adequate and visible expression.  Academic excellence forms a separate parameter, which must  overlap with the first parameter. Excellence in academic work is  partly a reflection of the rigor with which faculty and students  pursue their studies in the respective areas of their choice, but  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  28  excellence must also be perceived in a social perspective. As we  have discussed elsewhere in this report, our universities and  institutes tend to isolate themselves from the social world that  surrounds them. Quite often, they look like islands or oases,  protected by a boundary wall and gates. In several cities, the  contrast between the life and landscape one sees inside the gates  and outside is sadly stark. It shows the absence of social  responsibility in the concept of excellence. It also shows that the  concept of knowledge that such a university does not require  engagement or experiential construction of knowledge by  learners and teachers. It is necessary that all kinds of  documents generated by the university, including its syllabi, the  papers and books published by its faculty, the assignments  submitted by its students and other products such as audio and  video material, be treated as its knowledge products which need  to be sampled for independent assessment on the basis of  intrinsic merits as well as relevance for the study of problems  which are manifest in the university’s immediate social and  natural milieu.  The third parameter we propose is that of institutional self-  reform. An institution’s awareness of its own problems, its will  and capacity to study these problems and to draw roadmaps for  resolving them are indicators of its overall institutional quality.  Capacity for such an intrinsically inspired reform is also a sign  of true autonomy. Therefore, we feel that an important set of  criteria can be identified within a university’s own targets for  organizational improvement and its record of moving towards  them within specified time frames. Priority areas for such self-  motivated institutional reforms can be decided and articulated  by the university itself.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  29  It is important that universities set up processes of self-  evaluation, which are transparent and credible. Internationally,  academic institutions and universities set up teams consisting of  academics of eminence, recognized internationally for their  expertise and integrity to get themselves assessed. Even in India  we have such models available. For example, National law  Schools have a process of evaluation similar to this. IIMs have a  different process. Universities must submit themselves to  credible processes of evaluation which would only help them  establish their credentials in the academic world and society at  large in a transparent manner.  2.3 STRUCTURES, EXPANSION AND ACCESS  During the past two decades, even though there has been a rapid  expansion of the higher education system, it has been mainly through  private investments, since successive governments started reducing  their investments in higher education. A large number of colleges and  university-level institutions, including institutions deemed to be  universities commonly known as ‘deemed universities’, and private  universities established through State legislation, have come into  existence in recent years. There is a growing demand for further  expansion of private institutions.  The implications of the increasing trend towards privatization of higher  education need to be understood in terms of the system’s enrolment  capacity, programme focus, regional balance, and ownership pattern,  modes of delivery, and degree of regulation, quality and credibility as  well as social concerns of inclusiveness.  2.3.1 State universities and affiliated colleges  State universities are still the backbone of higher education in  India. Majority of our students get enrolled there and yet, it is  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  30  the State universities, which are meant to be the responsibility  of State Governments to maintain and develop, which have been  treated very shabbily in the matters of allocation of funds or  creation of more facilities to help them in enriching their existing  academic programmers.  Even though State Universities are primarily the responsibility of  States, because state legislatures create them, development of all  young people, be they in state-run institutions or central  institutions, is a national responsibility and there cannot be  any discrimination between the two. Ideally all benefits, which  are thought to be essential for a central university, should be  made available to the state universities. To achieve this state  governments would need to significantly enhance their support  to the universities while the Centre should make matching  incentivizing allocations available in a sense of a joint national  enterprise.  The current structure of the Indian university system has a large  number of affiliated colleges associated with either a Central or  State university, where bulk of the enrollment takes place. This  structure has burdened many universities with the management  of academic content, examination, and quality of these colleges.  In addition, while better colleges feel stifled by the university  bureaucracy – delays, controls, and inadequate support – the  better universities are affected by the limited thinking of the  college leadership and their negative role in university processes.  It is obvious that the better institutions are suffering and  creativity is a casualty.  It has been a plea of many academic planners that the colleges  need to be treated as the foundation of higher education similar  to the way primary schools are for school education.Qualitative  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  31  development of these colleges should be our priority. While the  initiative by the Central government to create more Central  facilities in the field of higher education should be welcomed,  one must not forget that money needs to be made available for  the qualitative development of colleges. Or, that even when new  universities are created, they should begin with undergraduate  education and build on There have been many suggestions in the past to eliminate the  this base their post-  affiliation system in India, which has been the bane of our  graduate programmes,  higher education system. Some of the suggestions include  thus becoming not  conversion of affiliated colleges to autonomous colleges,  only role models for the  creating a cluster of colleges with autonomous academic  responsibilities, upgrading some of them to university level  colleges in their States but  also a resource for them.  and separating examining universities. There are more than  The need is, therefore to  20,000 colleges in India. It can be confidently said that  renew and revitalize the  nearly 1,500 of them are very good colleges with a rich  college system and also to  history, strong infrastructure and a large body of students.  They can easily be upgraded to the level of universities. Then  “lighten the load” of these  universities and freeing  the better and large there are a large number of colleges, which can be clubbed in  colleges to become clusters and these clusters can be recognized as universities.  independent of the There is also a suggestion of creating universities, which  university processes. It  would be only examining bodies to which these colleges can be  has been argued that  affiliated. Colleges can also be encouraged to merge with each  underperformance of the  other to make optimal use of the resources. While doing so  State universities has a  it would be important that Colleges are given more autonomy  in academic, administrative and financial matters.  direct relation to their  size. Many of the State  universities have, over the However, it is necessary for the apex body in the field of  years, had more and more higher education to address this vexed problem in a  colleges affiliated to them, comprehensive manner as one of its first tasks and suggest a  which has made it very time frame for elimination of the present form of affiliating  system.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  32  difficult for them to perform the role of maintaining academic  quality.  There is a view that the optimum size of a university has not  only a quantitative but also a qualitative dimension. The  optimality of a university has to take account of a critical level of  students, teachers, disciplines, programmers of study and the  needs of society and its emergence as a nurturer and creator of  knowledge, which may vary across universities.  2.3.2 Growth of private-commercial providers  The absence of any significant expansion in different sectors of  higher education by the State has created a space for the growth  of private providers.  However, there has been no policy or guidelines to measure the  competence of private investors in starting and managing a  technical institution other than the requirement that it should  be registered as a non-profit or charitable trust or society.  This lacuna has been exploited by many investors, who have no  understanding or experience of the responsibilities associated  with institutions of higher education. The trusts or societies that  have been formed largely consist of immediate family members –  some of whom had little or no educational background - with  some exceptions.  All investments on the institution and all appointments and  service conditions and, to a considerable extent, most decisions  on admission of students in the management quota have been  under the control of such family trusts or societies. The principal  or the other academic staff members have been mostly excluded  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  33  from these processes and asked to mind only the requirements  of the university in terms of syllabus and examinations.  Specific studies need to be done regarding the sources of funds  utilized by such family trusts or societies as there are allegations  that such funds are either unaccounted wealth from business  and political enterprises (occasionally with some bank loans for  purposes of legitimacy) or from the capitation fees charged from  the students in addition to a plethora of unexplained fees  charged whimsically by these managements.  It must be mentioned that during   
the past two decades there have  also been many respectable  institutions established by private  individuals or corporations either  with some funding from the  government or with no public  funding. However, investors and  philanthropists wishing to set up  institutions of higher education  with noble motives have been  deterred by the unpredictable and  often whimsical rules and  regulations imposed on them by  regulatory bodies in this sector.  The solution to the unscrupulous  methods of some private investors  should not mean doing away with  their participation in the field of  higher education altogether.  In many private educational institutions, the  appointment of teachers is made at the lowest  possible cost. They are treated with scant dignity,  thereby turning away competent persons from  opting for the teaching profession. A limited  number of senior positions are filled at attractive  salaries, especially from other reputed institutions,  mainly for prestige. Otherwise, there are many  terrible instances of faculty being asked to work  in more than one institution belonging to the  management; their salary being paid only for nine  months; actual payments being much less than the  amount signed for; impounding of their certificates  and passports; compelling them to award pass  marks in the internal examination to the  “favorites” and fail marks for students who  protest illegal collections and so on.   
dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  34  In order to reach the goals of doubling the higher education  capacity from the present level, it will be necessary to encourage  participation of the private sector. At the same time it must be  emphasized that governments cannot afford to abandon the  responsibility for further augmentation of the existing capacity  entirely to the private sector.  In fact we must recognize the need for different layers of  institutions in the field of higher education, including state-run,  private and those established through public-private  partnerships. What is required in order to make all of them work  efficiently and serve overall national goals is the framing of  rational and consistent ground rules overseen by a transparent  regulatory mechanism.  Purely private initiatives require a credible corrective mechanism  to do away with the ills associated with it currently. It would be  necessary for instance that the present practice of family  members who sometimes don’t have the experience or the  competence relating to education occupying the controlling  position of the governing systems of the private educational  institutions be prevented. Similarly, the practice of conferring  academic designations such as Chancellor, Vice Chancellor, and  Pro Vice Chancellor on members of the family has to stop.  There is a need to have a clear understanding of the difference in  the roles of a promoter or philanthropist as a trustee as opposed  to being an executive of the institution he or she establishes.  Executives must have appropriate abilities and qualifications  required for the job.  All private institutions, which seek the status of a university, will  have to submit to a national accreditation system.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  35  It is also important that private initiatives in the field of higher  education are not driven by the sole motive of profit. They should  not confine themselves only to ‘commercially viable’ sectors of  education, such as management, accountancy and medicine etc.  but should also encompass areas of social and natural sciences  by establishing comprehensive universities.  Alternately, such institutions should be allowed to confer only  diplomas and certificates and not university degrees. These  certificates or diplomas, however, may be recognized by  universities for further upgradation to degree levels through  programmes of a more holistic nature.  All this would mean modification in the legal framework under  which such entities operate to include very tight regulations on  auditing their accounts, on transparency, on paying a minimum  stipulated salary to qualified and competent teachers, and an  insistence on a certain percentage of seats being provided full  scholarships/freeships on the basis of merit. The modalities of  this and of any mandatory reservations can be worked out.  2.3.3 Mushrooming of deemed universities  The sudden spurt in the number of newly established  educational institutes as deemed universities is another area of  concern. Some of the private institutions took the deemed-to-be  university route to get degree-granting powers. Between 2000  and 2005, 26 private-sponsored institutions got the deemed  university status. Since 2005, the number of private deemed  universities has increased to 108. By a notification of the UGC, it  is no longer necessary for them to use the adjective “deemed”  and they all call themselves simply universities. In Tamil Nadu  alone, the number of private deemed universities has increased  from 18 in 2007 to 35 in 2008 and many are in the queue.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  36  Though, the deemed universities do not have affiliating powers,  many of them have a number of campuses spread throughout  the country.  The provision for the status of deemed universities was made  with a noble intent. It was felt that the institutions, which had  unique and distinct character of their own could enjoy the  privileges of a university without losing their distinct character  and autonomy.  According to the University Grants Commission, in its guidelines  for considering any proposal for declaring an institution a  deemed university under Section 3 of the UGC Act, "the  institution should generally be engaged in teaching programmers  and research in chosen fields of specialization which are  innovative and of very high academic standard at the master's  and research levels. It should also have a greater interface with  society through extramural extension and field-action related  programmers."  In the first 10 years after the enactment of the UGC Act, eight  institutions were notified as deemed universities. In the 1970s,  the UGC decided that notification under Section 3 should be  made only rarely in special cases and three institutions were  conferred the deemed university status. There was a slight shift  in the policy in the 1980s and 18 more institutions were added  under Section 3.  Between 1956 and 1990, in 35 years, only 29 institutions were  granted the deemed university status. In the last 15 years, 63  institutions were declared deemed universities and particularly  in the last 5 years, 36 institutions, excluding RECs, have been  notified as deemed universities. It may be argued that the   
dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  37  at any level, including Ph.D., for a price. This has dealt a serious blow to the credibility   
increase in the number of deemed universities is commensurate  with the increase in the number of institutions of higher learning  in the country. What has raised the concern of the academic  world is the fact that the majority of these institutes are not  established with any educational purpose, and they end up only  deluding the students.  In view of considerable misuse of the provision for Deemed  University status, the granting of such status should be put on  hold till unambiguous and rational guidelines are evolved.  Institutions wishing to get deemed university status should  demonstrate special capabilities as was originally intended and  should be rigorously evaluated to see if they fulfill the holistic  and universal concept of university outlined in this report. The  institutions, which have somehow managed to secure such  status should be given a period of three years to develop as a  The behaviour of some private universities has become a matter of serious concern to a  large body of students and parents. There have been several instances of campus violence  and related litigations. A detailed probe into the basic reasons for the concerns revealed  that many of them were professional colleges that got approval from the regulatory bodies  for university status. Immediately thereafter, they started admitting five to six times their  intake capacity, without a corresponding increase in faculty strength or academic  infrastructure. The classes and laboratories were conducted at strange hours like a factory  production operation. The students who paid huge capitation fees felt cheated. The  students from the underprivileged sections could not get admission in many of them due to  heavy capitation fees.  The existing guidelines and the Memoranda of Association (MOA) with the UGC  were ambiguous and inappropriate to the new situation. Compounding the stigma is the  offer made by some of them, after obtaining university status, to give “guaranteed” degrees  of the Indian university degree.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  38  university and fulfill the prescribed accreditation norms failing  which the status given to them would be withdrawn.  Every University, Public or Private, could strive to attain the  status and eminence that is expected of a university , derived  from the adherence to the basic concepts of university discussed  in this regard in terms of curriculum, feasibility of its regulation  and transparency of the governance system. Every university,  large or small, should have the scope to rise up to the prestige  achieved through its performance and recognition. While the  State could do everything to enable the university to  demonstrate higher levels of performance, it is also incumbent  on the universities themselves to organize their programmers  and activities in a manner that would continue to attract the  support of the State as well as the Private enterprise. The ability  to attract partnership from private sector, either in the execution  of its programmers or in more enduring relationship will be  conditioned by the demonstration by the university as to how  well it is organized and by the level of its performance which  would be judged by the criteria as suggested in this report and  to be worked out by the apex body in the field of higher  education.  2.3.4 Issues of affordability  Many private institutions charge exorbitant fees (beyond the  prescribed norms) in the form of many kinds of levy (not  accounted for by vouchers and receipts) and are unable to  provide even minimum competent faculty strength. The non-  affordability of the programmers of such institutions to a vast  majority of eligible students is a matter of public concern.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  39  The regulatory agencies have been unable to come to grips with  the problems of capitation fee and unauthorized annual fees  mainly due to deficiencies in enforcement instruments, and  partly due to high-level reluctance to sort out this problem.  Since the norms for fixation of fees are vague, the quantum of  fees charged has no rational basis. The illegal capitation fees  range from: Rs. 1-10 lakh for the engineering courses; Rs. 20-40  lakh for MBBS courses; Rs. 5-12 lakh for dental courses; and  about Rs. 30,000-50,000 for courses in arts and science  colleges, depending on the demand.  Studies and research show that most of the private investment  in higher education is in the field of engineering, management  and medicine whereas the majority of enrollment is taking place  in traditional disciplines. The private providers are, therefore,  not putting their money in areas which attract the bulk of the  students, especially first generation university goers. This  remains the responsibility of the state. It is the middle class,  which has for long benefited from the state education system  and is now breaking away from it.  The primary focus should, therefore be on making education  affordable, either through scholarships or loans. An assured  loan to every student (and a scholarship based on merit for the  needy) in accredited institutions should be the aim (and  our recommendation). Institutional funding can then be for  capital costs and research, and based on the worthiness of  the institution. Once a student qualifies to enter an institution  of her choice, she should not be deprived of education for want  of money. It is the duty of the institution and the state to  provide for her education through means as suggested above.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  40  Steps need to be initiated to ensure availability of loans and  scholarships.  2.3.5 Foreign Universities  One has to keep in mind the fact that universities grow in  organic connection with their social, cultural and geographical  surroundings and even the best of them cannot be transplanted  somewhere else and expected to do as well. A university is  known not only for its courses, it is the physicality of it, which  gives it a unique character. As has been rightly said, education  is a touch-sport. Before taking any decision on allowing foreign  universities to operate in India we have to be very clear about  the purpose it is going is achieve. Don’t we want the best  learning experiences to be shared by our students? If so, can  this not be done by opening our doors to foreign scholars and  making our rules more flexible? Interaction with the best minds  of the world would only enhance the quality of our universities.  But giving an open license to all and sundry carrying a foreign  ownership tag to function like universities in India, most of them  not even known in their own countries, would only help them  earn profit for their parent institutions located outside or accrue  profit to the shareholders. If the best of foreign universities, say  amongst the top 200 in the world, want to come here and work,  they should be welcomed. Any decision in this regard has to be  taken with utmost care keeping in mind the features, which are  essential for an institution to be called a University. Such  institutions should give an Indian Degree and be subject to all  rules and regulations that would apply to any Indian University.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  41  2.3.6 Resource management and financing  2.3.6.1 Financing  It may be recognized that the cost of providing quality education  is increasing. Universities require constant infusion of resources  to maintain and upgrade their facilities, resources and  technologies. State funding for the same has been dwindling over  the years and is irregular. Universities are expected to raise their  own resources. This has resulted in poor infrastructure –  physical and intellectual – as well as introduction of very low  quality self-financing programmes that have no relationship with  the university curriculum.  While the State cannot walk away from its responsibility of  financing higher education, imaginative ways will have to be  devised to find complementary sources of funds so that our  universities can move beyond their current levels of engagement  with students and excellence in providing education. Changes in  regulatory systems are required to encourage philanthropy from  society.  Universities have not engaged on a continuous basis with their  stakeholders, particularly the alumni, to give them a sense of  participation and consequently, giving has suffered. Wherever  institutions have reached out to alumni and the society, they  have only benefitted. For instance, the alumni of the Institute of  Technology at BHU have recently built a guesthouse of the  university. Alumni at IITs and IIMs have also created resources  for their alma mater. Universities and other academic  institutions should be able to hire professional fund raisers and  professional investors to attract funding from non-government  sources.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  42  Funding to universities is inadequate, irregular and inflexible.  For every post, whether academic or non-academic, the  university has to face inordinate delays before approval, if any,  are given by funding agencies. As a consequence, universities  are unable to plan their development on any long-term basis.  Academics cannot see a trajectory of their progress due to  constraint on the number of professor/readers/lecturers that  the funding agency imposes on universities. Academics, globally,  compete with themselves rather than not get promoted for want  of a position at an appropriate level. Release of funds annually is  leading to delay in implementation of plans and is an intrusion  in the autonomy of the institution. Block grants against a plan  should become the norm with universities being competent  expend according to their priorities.  While it is true that a large number of students in our  universities need to be funded by their institution and the State,  there does exist a large student body that can also afford to pay  for their education. There is no reason why both these two  categories of students be placed on the same level when it comes  to financing their education. No student should be turned away  from an institution for want of funds for education. Absence of  differential fee has led to subsidization of a segment of student  body that can afford to pay for its education. Guaranteed  student loans at low interest rates for those who can take loans  and free education for those who cannot afford it at all will be  necessary to educate India.  National tests like GRE should be organized round the year and  students from all over the India aspiring to enter universities  should be allowed to take these tests as many times as they like.  Their best test score can then be sent to the universities of their  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  43  choice which can admit them if they satisfy other criteria set up  be the universities. This requires a rethinking on the need to  continue with State Boards of Secondary Education and the  Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) which are  instruments for normalizing school level competencies – a  purpose equally accomplished by the national tests mentioned  here – and seriously think of reviving our faith in each school  and its teachers to credibly evaluate its own students.  India is in a unique position to serve as a destination for  affordable higher education for a vast number of students from  countries in the southern hemisphere. At present, our system  manages to attract only a small fraction of this potential  clientele. If systemic impediments are removed and academically  imaginative and flexible programmes are made available, the  participation of foreign students in our higher education can  significantly increase. Apart from the benefit it will provide to  them, it will enrich the ethos of our universities as well.  2.3.6.2 Human Resource Management  Irrespective of the checks and balances one may place on a  regulatory system, we will have to ultimately depend on the  quality of people in our universities to ensure its health over  time. The best and the brightest in India are no longer aspiring  to become teachers. The university ambience and the controls  imposed on it do not permit the youth to be able to contribute  unencumbered to her research or gain from the intrinsic joy of  teaching. Urgent measures are needed to bring such people who  enjoy teaching and research back to the university. Resources  in terms of laboratories, libraries, research assistance etc. as  well as competitive remuneration would be needed to attract as  well as retain good people to our universities.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  44  Higher education has lost a generation of academics due to the  inability of universities to find place for their scholarship. The  constraints from the funding agency had led universities to stop  recruitment of faculty even on approved positions. Positions of  retiring academics are lost. Retired academics are re-hired to  teach and are paid meagerly for each session. This is indeed a  national shame and not a strategy of developing higher  education in the world’s most promising country.  Quality of teaching is the best indicator and a key determinant  of the overall quality of institutional life. Any reform of higher  education, therefore, must give the highest priority to attracting  good teachers and giving them a positive and motivating  environment. It is important that the universities attract talent  from diverse backgrounds and take care not to encourage  inbreeding. Assessment of teachers is another area which has  been in discussion for quite some time. It is necessary to  remember that while research and publications can serve as  important criteria for assessing the scholarly dimension of a  teacher's personality, students are in a unique position to  provide an experiential assessment of the quality of teaching.  Parameters of student feedback can be drawn up so as to avoid  distorting factors, such as the tendency to earn cheap popularity  by using conventional means like dictating examination-oriented  notes. Student feedback at the end of each semester should  become a routine, and teachers whose feedback record remains  poor in successive years should be required to face formal  procedures which might allow a university or college to shed  them.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  45  2.4 GOVERNANCE AND AUTONOMY  Autonomy is arguably the lifeline of any institution that deals with  education, creation of knowledge and learning of all kinds. Of equal  importance however is the need for governance structures which ensure  the preservation of such autonomy under all circumstances.  2.4.1 Poor governance of universities  Universities remain one of the most under-managed  organizations in our society. The governance structures are  archaic and have not changed with changing environment to  meet the expectations of its various stakeholders. While most  other organizations in society have adapted themselves in terms  of organizational design, mechanisms for conducting their  business and motivating people, use of technology to bring  effectiveness in operations etc., universities have not changed  much.  Hard rules that were framed for a past era still dominate rather  than soft-processes and collegial consensus making. All of these  have led to centralization of decision-making and low  involvement of faculty and students in most policy decisions  affecting academics. These may have been the direct outcomes of  low autonomy as well as low management skills amongst  administrators at these institutions.  There is an urgent need to improve governance by developing  expertise in “educational management” and avoid burdening  good academics with administrative chores. One way to go about  this is to encourage universities to start programmes in  management of educational institutions. A separation between  academic administration and overall management (including  fund-raising) may be desirable. In this context it will be  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  46  necessary for many state governments to abandon the trend of  appointing of civil servants as university administrators.  In general the Governance structure of centrally funded  institutions, such as the Central Universities, IITs, NITs, IIITs,  IISERs etc., are relatively more autonomous than the state  funded institutions. Even among state institutions, National Law  Universities enjoy high levels of autonomy as compared to other  state universities. The governance structure and autonomy of  the IIMs are one step ahead of the IITs, which – in turn - were  beyond the traditional universities. This progression needs to be  continued.  Any change in the governance structures of a university should  be aimed at achieving more autonomy for it. In academic  matters, the teacher should have complete autonomy to frame  her/his course and the way she/he would like to assess her/his  students. This autonomy should also be available to the  students who should be allowed to take courses of their choice  in a relaxed manner from different universities and then be  awarded a degree on the basis of the credits they have earned.  2.4.2 Interference in university functioning: Loss of autonomy  Interference, from various political or commercial vested  interests, in the functioning and priorities of the universities  comes in many different forms and intensities. It touches all  aspects of higher education and involves improper admission of  students, pressures in selection of teachers, manipulation in  appointment of senior functionaries like vice-chancellors,  registrars and deans, purchase of equipment and allotment of  construction contracts and so on.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  47  A society with high propensity for corrupt practices in the higher  education system should reflect on the long-term damages this  entails. It should be possible to reduce this effect either through  persuasion or exposure by a vigilant society, failing which a  significant number of disappointed and frustrated youth may  take to ways that may lead to violence and social disorder. An  attempt was made by the UGC not long ago, to demand  academic and administrative audit of higher educational  institutions, to be eligible for its support. This was meant to be  essentially an introspection process with a viable internal quality  assurance cell to overcome undesirable practices and enforce  quality norms. This has now become defunct.  Making a cursory review of the quality of Indian institutions by  whatever yardstick one may choose, it is gratifying to note that a  substantial number of higher educational institutions  demonstrate a credible record of quality and ethics. Most of  these are Centrally funded institutions like Central universities,  institutions of national importance such as IITs, several higher  technology and management institutions and some state-funded  institutions. One common feature they share among them is  their structure of governance, consisting of eminent persons,  excluding practicing politicians and including only a limited  representation from the Government. Autonomy in the true  sense is available to these institutions with the guidance and  support of such governing bodies.  Similarly, the appointments of heads of such institutions, like  vice-chancellors, directors etc., are made by Search Committees  with candidates of impeccable credentials, keeping the best  interest of the institution in view. It is a matter of deep concern  that in recent years, choosing persons for such high-level  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  48  appointments is becoming scandalous in several states involving  political and financial considerations at the cost of qualifications  and competence.  At this point of time when the university system in India is  subjected to harsh criticism, it would be worthwhile to examine  the underlying processes that influence the functioning of our  universities. The Kothari Commission recognized the imperatives  of university autonomy and cautioned that, “only an autonomous  institution, free from regimentation of ideas and pressure of party  or power politics, can pursue truth fearlessly and build up in its  teachers and students, habits of independent thinking and a spirit  of enquiry unfettered by the limitations and prejudices of the near  and the immediate which is so essential for the development of a  free society”.  The report of the Knowledge Commission also recognizes this  phenomenon. It states that, “the autonomy of universities is  eroded by interventions from government and intrusions from  political processes.” It further adds that, “experience suggests  that implicit politicization has made governance of universities  exceedingly difficult and much more susceptible to entirely non-  academic interventions from outside. This problem needs to be  recognized and addressed in a systematic manner within  universities but also outside, particularly in governments,  legislatures and political parties”.  The university system in India is unfairly condemned by  comparing it with world-class institutions without pondering  over the disabling resource crunches and vexing political  interferences. It has been proved that wherever the higher  educational institutions have a governance system which  functions with a high degree of autonomy, their performance  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  49  have earned national and international respect not withstanding  financial constraints. The absence of any sense of academic and  administrative autonomy, introduces a high degree of  educational and social distortion.  2.4.3 Subversion from within  One needs to realize that blaming private initiative, political  interference and other forces for the loss of autonomy of  universities is not sufficient. An objective observer of the  university system in India would accept that there was no  rigorous resistance from within the academic community to the  role played by socio-political and market forces to manipulate  and subvert the normative structures of the university system.  The subversion ranges from matters of policy implementation to  appointments and the day-to-day functioning of the institutions.  There is a need for deep introspection by the academia on the  origins and the extent of the crisis that the higher education  system is going through and on its own role in exacerbating this  crisis. This introspection would reveal that there has been a  willing abdication on part of the academic community, of the  autonomy which was available to it. Education was made  subservient to ideological compulsions which led to its loss of  respect.  The independence of scholarship from power has often been put  to test and regrettably the academic community has, on most  crucial occasions, failed. It has resulted in a situation where it  has become easy for some of those in power and in the  bureaucracy to curtail the autonomy as the academic  community has proved itself to be unworthy of practicing it.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  50  2.5 MULTIPLICITY OF REGULATORY SYSTEMS  The responsibility for the establishment and monitoring of the  performance of this large variety of institutions has been exercised by  many different statutory regulatory bodies as well as governments and  universities, often leading to multiplicity of authorities and duplication  of inspection and control. In this process, the need for stimulating  innovations of curricula, experimenting with the approaches to teaching  and learning, and establishing meaningful links with the society have  rarely been emphasized.  Only a few organizations such as the UGC took major initiatives in  fostering educational innovations such as setting up of inter-university  centres to facilitate national synergy in research efforts among  universities and to optimize the investments in sophisticated research  infrastructure. The creation of country-wide educational communication  facility through multiple platforms and creating large-scale contents;  the setting up of national network of libraries including e-journals for  convenient access to higher educational institutions across the country;  special incentives to advanced centres of research; and additional  resources to institutions with potential for excellence were some of the  other initiatives of the UGC in the recent past. However, the initiatives  occurred randomly with no sustainable goals for further multiplication.  Given the national aspirations for greater and equitable access to  knowledge it is essential that the regulatory system propel the growth in  the right direction. A well-designed regulatory system will also help to  promote a high degree of professionalism in managing higher education  institutions.  A highly over-regulated system consists of interference by multiple  agencies which tend to stifle innovation and creativity, increase  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  51  inefficiency and breed corruption and malpractices. An under-regulated  system encourages exploitation, contributions to disorder and erosion of  social justice. Therefore, it is important to design a balanced and all  encompassing regulatory mechanism that is overarching ,  transparent and ensures accountability which would evoke confidence  in the academic institutions and academic body at large.  It needs to be realized at this stage that the creation of bodies like the  AICTE, ICAR, MCI and so on has certainly helped in focusing attention  on specialized areas. It has, at the same time, fragmented the higher  educational sector in the country from a policy perspective.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  52  The higher education institutions in India are regulated by many statutory agencies such as the  All India Council of Technical Education (AICTE), Bar Council of India (BCI), Council of  Architecture (COA), Indian Nursing Council (INC), Medical Council of India (MCI),  National Council on Teacher Education (NCTE), Pharmacy Council of India (PCI),Distance  Education Council(DEC), University Grants Commission (UGC) and so on. In addition,  there are regulations of the institutions by Central and State universities as well as by the  Directorates of College and Technical Education in each State, leading to undesirable  cubicalization of knowledge, unwarranted fragmentation of disciplines and separation of  knowledge from application and skills.  The regulatory provisions of the various Acts are substantially different from each other  since they were created at different periods by different legislations. The overall responsibilities for  the entire higher education system assigned to the UGC are not validated in the provisions of  other Acts. There is very little co-ordination among the statutory bodies in respect of degree  durations, approval mechanisms, accreditation processes, etc. It sometimes leads to very  embarrassing situations in which we find two regulatory agencies at loggerheads and fighting legal  cases against each other. There are various stages of regulation such as approval, recognition,  affiliation and accreditation.  This has, on many occasions, created situations where different  agencies have taken different views on issues of regulation and  promotion of higher education. While the need to pay focused attention  on some important aspects of education remains valid, it is imperative  that a holistic view of education is not lost. In terms of regulation what  it requires is a De Novo regulatory body under which the various  functions of existing regulatory agencies would be subsumed. The  powers vested currently in these multiple agencies for regulating  creation of academic institutions and their content would be also taken  over by the proposed apex regulatory body. The idea of a single  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  53  regulatory body for higher education has been in discussion for more  than two decades. There have been suggestions to create a co-  ordination council of various existing regulatory bodies, which could  ensure harmony in their views. A mechanism, which seeks to  defragment policy areas, would need to act like one mind. Co-ordination  among agencies which have different views of knowledge and education  and which tend to treat knowledge within narrow confines is extremely  difficult, if not impossible. It would, therefore be necessary to have a  single apex body in the field of higher education which treats all  knowledge areas in an integrated manner and works towards  convergences which overarching regulatory powers. Only such a body  would ensure that there is a live and close interaction among co-  thinkers and co-workers and there is no dilution of any idea, which it  has to suffer if made to traverse a bureaucratic maze.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  54  3. RECOVERING THE IDEA OF A UNIVERSITY: A ROADMAP  There is no doubt that the Indian higher education system, given the  enormity of the challenges it is facing, needs a drastic overhaul. Apart from  various short-term issues there is a serious threat to the very idea of the  university and its values of knowledge generation in our society today.  This report is therefore making definitive recommendations pertaining to the  overall structure of the system of higher education in the country. However,  what exactly needs to be done in detail is beyond the scope of this Report  and we are separately suggesting that a Task Force is given the  responsibility for it. Implementation of our prescription has to be worked out  by institutions of higher education themselves, in keeping with the  principles of autonomy and self-regulation that this report seeks to preserve  and promote.  3.1 A NEW REGULATORY FRAMEWORK  A holistic view of knowledge would demand a regulatory system, which  treats the entire range of educational institutions in a holistic manner.  All of higher education has to be treated as an integrated whole.  Professional education cannot be detached from general education. It  would be, therefore, imperative that all higher education, including  engineering, medicine, agriculture , law and distance education, is  brought within the purview of a single, all-encompassing higher  education authority.  The National Policy of Education (1986) and the Plan of Action, 1992  envisaged the establishment of a national apex body for bringing about  greater co-ordination and integration in the planning and development  of higher education system which would include research.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  55  The UGC has performed its overarching function of steering the higher  education in this country. However, over time, new Councils have been  set up to promote and regulate specialized areas of education.  Presently, there are 13 such professional Councils created under  various Acts of Parliament. We see the present functions of these  Councils as two-fold; first, the bench-marking of standards for  professional practice and second, the pedagogy and academic inputs  required for professional studies. It needs to be acknowledged that not  all academic engagement in a professional programme of study leads to  practice of the profession. A medical graduate may not necessarily  practice medicine but choose to engage in research in allied areas or  teach including interacting with other disciplinary areas. Increasingly,  there is convergence of disciplines which were stand alone in the past.  It is, therefore, proposed that the academic functions of all these  professional bodies, be subsumed under an apex body for Higher  Education, to be called The National Commission for Higher  Education and Research (NCHER). Rather than acting as bodies  engaged in giving licenses to professional institutions, these bodies  should be looking after the fitness of the people who wish to practice in  their respective fields. They should be divested of their academic  functions. They may conduct regular qualifying tests for professionals  in their respective fields – a Bar Council exam for practicing advocates  for example. The professional councils may prescribe syllabi for such  exams and leave it to the universities to design their curriculum  including such syllabi. All academic decisions should necessarily be left  to academics in universities. Similarly, any ‘vocational’ or technical  education, which is post-secondary, should be the concern of the  universities.  This is not just a change in the nomenclature of UGC or any other  existing regulatory body. The structure and composition of the  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  56  proposed NCHER, which would also subsume UGC, AICTE, NCTE and  DEC apart from the academic aspects of the professional Councils, is  meant to insulate it from political and other external interferences from  the government of the day. By making it report directly to the Indian  Parliament, it is ensured that the NCHER would be made fully  accountable. The proposed NCHER should move away from the current  tendencies of the existing regulatory bodies to control and impose  bureaucratic interferences in the functioning of universities and  colleges.  The creation of this entirely new structure of NCHER is being proposed  with full realization of the commendable role played by the UGC for a  long time. It was created at a time when there were hardly more than 25  universities and practically no private university. Times have changed  dramatically and the challenges in the field of higher Education demand  an entirely new approach towards the issue of regulation. It would do  no good if we go for incremental changes in the present regulatory  structures. A new structure created to respond to the new emerging  realities has always a better chance to last more than the older frames  with incremental changes. This is with full realization that a time may  come when the structure, which is now being proposed, would be  deemed as insufficient and then new ways of managing higher  education would be found out by future generations.  The National Commission for Higher Education and Research  (NCHER) would perform its regulatory function without interfering with  academic freedom and institutional autonomy. It would not take  recourse to inspection-based approval method. From the current  inspection-approval method, it would move to a verification and  authentication system. As a matter of fact, we envisage universities and  institutions to put out self-declarations mandatorily in the public  domain for scrutiny. Universities are to be seen as self-regulatory bodies  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  57  and the Commission is to be seen as a catalytic agency which is more  interested in creating more and more space for the individuality of each  university and protecting their autonomy.  Keeping in mind the federal nature of our country and the role of the  States in the field of higher education, it would be necessary to create  Higher Education Councils in the states which would be in constant  dialogue with the national NCHER with an aim to create a comparable  national system of higher education which respects regional diversities  and also allows different kinds of institutions, created by the state or  the centre to grow on equal footing. There are already some states with  well functioning Higher Education Councils, like West Bengal, Kerala  and Andhra Pradesh. Other states can be encouraged, through  appropriate incentives, to establish such bodies. These HECs would  also insulate State Universities and institutions from outside  interference.  3.2 Objectives of the Commission for Higher Education and Research  (NCHER) . The Commission shall:  ➢ Be responsible for comprehensive, holistic evolution of HE sector;  ➢ Strategize and Steer the expansion of higher education;  ➢ Ensure autonomy of the universities and shield them from  interference by external agencies;  ➢ Acts as a catalyst and also as a conduit to encourage joint/cross-  disciplinary programs between and amongst Universities and  Institutes;  ➢ Spearhead continuous reforms and renovation in the area of higher  education;  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  58  ➢ Establish robust global connectivity and make it globally  competitive while creating our own world class standards;  ➢ Promote greater engagement and enhancing resources to State  universities with an aim to bridge the divide between the State and  Central universities;  ➢ Ensure good governance, transparency and quality in higher  education;  ➢ Connect with industry and other economic sectors to promote  innovations;  ➢ Devise mechanisms for social audit processes and public feedback  on its performance and its achievements; and  ➢ Devise mechanisms for social audit processes and public feedback  on its performance and achievements.  3.3 RESTRUCTURING UNIVERSITIES  The foundational principle on which Indian universities need to be  restructured is that complete autonomy of institutions of higher  learning is essential for free pursuit of knowledge. While in practice,  autonomy of any institution is closely linked to structural factors such  as its sources of finance, the legal framework it operates under and  rules and regulations it is subjected to, it is also critically dependent on  the overall culture prevailing within them.  So in order to achieve autonomy, Indian institutions of higher learning  need to:  a) Be freed from control of both government and ‘for-profit’ private  agencies in matters of not just academics but also finance and  administration;  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  59  b) Collectively frame for themselves a transparent set of rules to guide  their regular functioning and submit themselves to an  internationally recognized process of evaluation;  c) Foster a culture of independent assertion of ideas, guarding of  institutional prerogatives from external interference, transparency  and accountability for decisions taken.  The process by which institutions of higher learning obtain autonomy is  also critical to their ability to first understand its value and sustain it in  the long run. It is recommended that a series of consultations, dialogue  and debate be undertaken by the NCHER with wide participation from  all relevant sections of society to arrive at a broad consensus on the  details of the structural changes needed to ensure autonomy.  The University will facilitate undergraduate education program in a  manner that all students will have opportunities to access several  disciplines in all knowledge areas. In addition the universities will also  have vibrant research areas, not oriented towards any particular  department, but built around thematic concerns. This will enable  researchers from several disciplines to work together. It would also be  worthwhile to create ‘ virtual departments’ to represent emerging areas  of knowledge which can have members from more than one university.  In order to facilitate this primary goal it is necessary to have a  governance system that is visionary and transparent and leadership at  all levels, including VCs.  Universities have become strongly centralized at the levels of the Vice  Chancellors and Registrars with little or no participation of individual  faculty. Institutions that are faculty governed (when it comes to  academic leadership) are found to be more nimble and reactive to  changes in the environment. This rigidity is largely derived from the  controls currently exercised by the governments. Delays in appointment  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  60  of VCs, approval of faculty positions, approval of funds for new  programmes, disbursement of funds etc., and even in fixation of  pensions at times, are not uncommon. In addition, the academic  institutions that are controlled either by the Central or State  governments are found to suffer from certain rigidity in developing  innovative academic as well as compensation-related practices.  Persons associated with administering and managing academic  institutions are most often not trained or equipped with knowledge of  best or next practices in academia globally. Universities have not been  able to attract talented administrators for a variety of reasons.  The increasing involvement of Higher Education Institutions and  Universities in long drawn out litigation in judicial courts is also a  matter of deep concern. Such litigation often involves various stake-  holder groups and at times even institutions vying with each other  legally. Precious time that ought to be devoted to teaching, learning and  research is spent wastefully in courts of law, which is avoidable. We feel  that there should be a fast-track statutory mechanism in place for the  adjudication of disputes between teachers, employees and management  of institutions and universities in respect of matters concerning service  conditions, as well as in matters of disputes relating to fee, admissions  etc. We recommend that a suitable law be enacted to establish a  National Education Tribunal along with State Education Tribunals or  appropriate number of Benches of the Apex Tribunal in place for such  adjudication. This would be in line with the observations of the  Supreme Court of India in the TMA Pai matter, where such Tribunals  were recommended.  The leadership of universities is often in the hands of government  administrators as well as executive councils or similar agencies that are  far removed from the institutions and do not have a good understanding  of the issues of concern, needs of development and growth of  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  61  institutions. In addition, these councils are too large in numbers to  make nuanced decisions. Many a time, the boards or equivalent bodies  are filled with ex-officio members who change so often that their  presence on these bodies becomes disruptive due to lack of continuity.  The VCs most often have low degrees of freedom in terms of  administrative stretch, and faculty often has even lower degrees of  freedom vis a vis the university authorities.  Universities need the autonomy to operate in a healthy competitive  setting. The leadership of the university must be driven by the  objectives of the institution and draw on government only for macro  policies. They need to set their own policies and thereby experiment  with strategies on university governance. They need to be accountable  to the various stakeholders – the society, government, students,  recruiters, alumni etc. A University needs a governance system, which  is engaged with the university and comprising people who understand  the ethos of the institution. The role of VCs is to attract the best of  students, faculty and staff to the institution by making their institution  very attractive to these talents.  The governance structure of a university should be revamped so as to  make them more democratic and efficient in their functioning. The  academic decisions need to be freed from excessive bureaucratic  controls both within as well as outside the university. At the same time  a university needs to engage with society. Creating consultative bodies  on the lines of Parliamentary Consultative Committees can also ensure  participation of people’s representatives at different levels. This  mechanism would be statutory in nature and it would be mandatory  for the university to share all information with such committees.  The role of a VC is to provide academic leadership to the university,  develop and execute the vision of the university including its growth  and to ensure that the university is academically and financially  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  62  healthy. This requires skills that reach beyond academic talent. The VC  must enunciate a sound financial model for the university and  undertake the fiduciary responsibility of the university. He/she also  ensures that the regulatory requirements are met. He/she works with  the Pro-VC and the Deans to manage the activities of the institution.  The universities should also be able to employ professional fund-  raisers who have the skills to identify the unique selling points of the  university and persuade potential donors and investors to invest in the  university. One obstacle today is the lack of any trust about the proper  utilization of the donation or beneficial use of money.   
dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  63  in the minds of young students and faculty.   
3.4 AGENDA FOR ACTION  i. Creation of an all-encompassing National Commission for Higher  Education and Research (NCHER), a Constitutional body to replace  the existing regulatory bodies including the UGC, AICTE, NCTE and  DEC (See Appendix A) and to follow up the Constitutional  amendment with an appropriate law for the Commission’s  functioning;  ii. Universities to be made responsible regarding the academic content  of all courses and programmes of study including professional  courses. Professional bodies like the AICTE, NCTE, MCI, BCI, COA,  INC, PCI etc. to be divested of their academic functions, which  A Few premises on institutional autonomy of universities  ➢ Any agency whose intention is to protect students from sub-par education is better off by providing  information on the programmers and universities to the student rather than walk the slippery path of  establishing minimum standards of quality (for education is about academic over-reach rather than  reaching the minimum). The objective is also to ensure that universities follow national policies on equity  and ensure that no student is turned away for want of financial resources.  ➢ The above, however, may not ensure that certain national or social objectives will get achieved. Here, the  above suggestion has to be supported with targeted subsidies to induce certain desired behavior. This will  be a wiser way of persuading universities to behave in a certain manner without coercion or intrusion in  the autonomy of the institutions.  ➢ The rest of the areas of failure in policy design & implementation (especially, when it comes to public  interest) is hoped to be plugged through good judgment of policy-makers and university administrators.  ➢ Decentralize decision-making to universities vis-à-vis the Central or State agencies.  ➢ Decisions regarding an institution must be taken by its board of governors or other similar bodies as  opposed to agencies in national or State capitals. The latter do not understand well the nuanced  requirements of individual institutions.  ➢ Learning and innovation requires unencumbered thinking and building a sense of infinite possibilities  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  64  would be restored to the universities;  iii. Curricular reform to be the topmost priority of the newly created  NCHER which would create a curricular framework based on the  principles of mobility within a full range of curricular areas and  integration of skills with academic depth;  iv. It should be mandatory for all universities to have a rich  undergraduate programme and undergraduate students must get  opportunities to interact with the best faculty. While appointing  teachers to the universities their affiliation to a particular college  should also be specified to emphasize the need for their exposure  to undergraduate students;  v. Undergraduate programs to be restructured to enable students to  have opportunities to access all curricular areas with fair degree  of mobility. It is highly recommended that normally, no single  discipline or specialized university should be created;  vi. The vocational education sector is at present outside the purview  of universities and colleges. Alienation of this sector can be  overcome by bringing it under the purview of universities and by  providing necessary accreditation to the courses available in  polytechnics, industrial training institutions, and so on.  Additionally the barriers to entry into universities for students  going through vocational training should be lowered to enable  them to upgrade their knowledge base at any stage of their  careers;  vii. The NCHER should also galvanize research in the university  system through the creation of a National Research Foundation;  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  65  viii. New governing structures to be evolved to enable the universities  to preserve their autonomy in a transparent and accountable  manner;  ix. Practice of according status of deemed university be stopped  forthwith till the NCHER takes a considered view on it. It would  be mandatory for all existing deemed universities to submit to the  new accreditation norms to be framed on the lines proposed in  this report within a period of three years failing which the status  of university should be withdrawn. However, unique educational  initiatives which have over a period of time enriched higher  education by their innovations to be given recognition and  supported appropriately;  x. Modern higher education system requires extension facilities,  sophisticated equipment and highly specialized knowledge and  competent teachers. It would not be possible for every university  to possess the best of these infrastructures. Hence, one of the  primary tasks of the NCHER to create several inter-university  centres (IUCs) in diverse fields to create the best of these  possibilities and attract the participation of several institutions of  higher learning to avail them. The model already successfully  demonstrated by the IUCs of the UGC like the Inter University  Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics, Inter University  Accelerator Centre and others, would be a valuable guidance in  their structures, governance, operation and support.  xi. Institutions of excellence like the IITs and IIMs to be encouraged  to diversify and expand their scope to work as full-fledged  universities, while keeping intact their unique features, which  shall act as pace-setting and model governance systems for all  universities;  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  66  xii. One of the first tasks of the NCHER should be to identify the best  1,500 colleges across India to upgrade them as universities, and  create clusters of other potentially good colleges to evolve as  universities.  xiii. Universities to establish live relationship with the real world  outside and develop capacities to respond to the challenges faced  by rural and urban economies and culture;  xiv. All levels of teacher education to be brought under the purview of  higher education;  xv. A national testing scheme for admission to the universities on the  pattern of the GRE to be evolved which would be open to all the  aspirants of University education, to be held more than once a  year . Students would be permitted to send their best test score to  the university of their choice.  xvi. Quantum of Central financial support to State-funded universities  be enhanced substantially on an incentive pattern, keeping in  view the needs for their growth;  xvii. Expansion of the higher education system to be evaluated and  assessed continuously to excel and to respond to the needs of  different regions in India in order to ensure not only equity and  access but also quality and opportunity of growth along the  academic vertical. The NCHER too should be subject to external  review once in five years.  xviii. Establish a National Education Tribunal with powers to  adjudicate on disputes among stake-holders within institutions  and between institutions so as to reduce litigation in courts  involving universities and higher education institutions; and  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  67  xix. Set up a Task Force to follow up on the implementation of this  Agenda for Action within a definite time-frame.  Some of these recommendations may be implemented immediately  while others may take some evolutionary steps and procedures. Even  so, it is hoped that the ideas behind them would be kept alive by  keeping them under active and wide-ranging discussions. In fact, there  should be an educational movement to continuously articulate and  debate these issues so that changes are made in keeping with the  emerging trends nationally and globally on the most effective forms of  higher education.  These recommendations are not for all times to come. There should be  sufficient social and political awareness to continuously monitor and  adopt new innovations based on the ever evolving demands of the  society and economy.  -o-  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  68  APPENDIX  A : ROLE OF THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HIGHER EDUCATION AND  RESEARCH (NCHER)  ➢ While acting as the apex regulatory body in the field of higher education in India it creates an enabling environment for universities to become self-regulatory bodies;  ➢ Becomes the premier advisory body to the Central and State  Governments on policy issues regarding higher education in India;  ➢ Prepares and presents a Report on the State of Higher Education in  India annually to Parliament;  ➢ Serves as a think tank on higher education policy in the country: provides a vision of higher education to be reflected in a curriculum framework, benchmarks universities, compares with institutions globally, develops requirements of disciplines, proposes new education policies both for Central and the State institutions, and evaluates the costs and price of education;  ➢ The Commission would create appropriate norms, processes and  structures for ensuring quality and accrediting universities;  ➢ Establishes transparent norms and process for entry and exit of institutions – the need is to make the process easy for good and serious proposals for setting up new institutions;  ➢ Develops sources & mechanisms of funding for universities and other  institutions, including for research;  ➢ Initiates measures to ensure that governance in universities is done in a  transparent and accountable manner;  ➢ Provides the mechanism for a national database on higher education;  ➢ Helps in creating an environment in academic institutions that is  conducive to bring young people to take up academia as a career;  ➢ Creates soft processes for interaction between students and teachers;  ➢ Lightens the load of Universities, by developing a scheme to gradually  free the universities of the colleges affiliated to them.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  69  STRUCTURE OF THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HIGHER  EDUCATION AND RESEARCH (NCHER)  The National Commission for Higher Education and Research (NCHER) has  to be a body, which would inspire confidence in the academic community of  India and serve as the voice of the academic community related to higher  education and gains the serious attention of policy-makers. Its structure and  composition and the process of its formation has to be such that it acquires  an autonomous character of its own.  The NCHER would be an autonomous body created by making a suitable  amendment to the Constitution, accountable only to the Indian parliament  and drawing its budgetary resources from the Ministry of Finance. It would  have a seven-member board with a full-time Chairperson. Of the seven  members, one would be an eminent professional from the world of industry  and one with the background of a long and consistent social engagement. All  other five members would be academic people of eminence, representing  broad areas of knowledge.  The structure of the National Commission for Higher Education and  Research would not be top heavy and its role would be free of excessive  centralization of regulation of universities and colleges. The status of the  Chairperson of the commission should be analogous to that of the Chief  Election Commissioner and that of the members should be comparable to  the Election Commissioners.  The Process of identifying the Chairperson and members should be vested  with a search committee comprising the Prime Minister, the Leader of the  Opposition in Parliament and the Chief Justice of India in consultation with  a Collegium consisting of eminent academics, learned academies and  prestigious institutions relating to the fields of knowledge in diverse fields.  The Chairperson of the NCHER should be invited to appear before both the  Houses of the Parliament or its Committees and appraise the members about  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  70  the state of Higher Education in India and the directions for its growth and  development. While the NCHER is expected to devise its own processes and  structure for functioning, it is suggested that the Commission may initially  consist of five divisions. These are suggested to be as follow:  Future Directions: Developing global benchmarks on student performance;  university performance; salaries, potential programmers; new research  directions; and articulation of needs of the government in terms of  manpower etc.  Accreditation Management: Creating norms for accreditation and certifying  multiple accreditation agencies which would be independent of the  government .Institutions and universities may like to get accreditation  from one or more than one agencies depending on their reputation. They  would be also providing annual feedback to universities, and organizing  workshops etc.  Funding & Development: Developing funding needs of universities, developing  mechanisms for funding institutions, helping universities with development  of corpus and good endowment management, managing the guaranteed  student loan/scholarship programme, and funding the requirements of  universities etc.  New Institutions & Incubation :including training workshops for first-time  VCs as well as on themes like accounting, investing the corpus,  communication within & outside the university, negotiations & managing  vendors, good office practices, human resource management etc.  Information & Governance: This division will focus on managing the data  needs of the commission, display of information on universities, develop  performance parameters on the governance of universities, support other  divisions with information as well as provide students with information on  each university. This division will also inform the Accreditation and Funding  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  71  & Development divisions of the performance or lack thereof, for each  university, each year.  An eminent academic with a tenure of five years would head each division.  Each board member would be an overseer of one or two of the divisions.  Each division will have an advisory board. The advisory board will comprise  eminent persons from India or abroad.  The Chairperson and the five heads of the above-mentioned divisions would  form the executive body of the commission, which would oversee all its  functions.  The Commission will be independent of all ministries of the Government of  India. It will have the autonomy to hire talent at various levels within and  outside the government. It will also have the autonomy to define the  compensation of its employees.  It is also crucial that NCHER develops a talented group of professionals who  understand the proposed philosophy and see the difference between the  existing and proposed processes.  It is important to keep in mind that the transition from the present  regulatory system to the proposed one would not be easy. A smooth  transition would require availing the expertise already available with the  present apex bodies. Transition to the new organizational frame should  enhance the people working in the present structures. Maximum care needs  to be taken to ensure that the creation of the new apex body does not affect  these people adversely. However, this need not be a constraint while deciding  the structure of the new body. All this needs very careful analysis of the  potential requirements. It is proposed that the job to provide operational  frame should be assigned as a project on a consultancy basis to a competent  professional organization. A task force would need to be constituted by the  Government to work out the details of the process of implementation of the  recommendations once they are accepted.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  72  B. Draft for according constitutional status to the proposed  Commission for Higher Education and Research.  (1) There shall be a Commission for all matters relating to or incidental to  the regulation of standards in all branches of Higher Education,  including technical, medical and professional education in any field of  knowledge, to be known as the National Commission for Higher  Education and Research.  (2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament,  the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and six other Members  to be appointed by the President, by warrant under his hand and seal;  and the conditions of service and tenure of office of the Chairperson and  other Members so appointed shall be as may be provided in such law.  (3) The Commission shall have powers to regulate its own procedure.  (4) It shall be the duty of the Commission to:  Make regulations specifying academic standards and related norms and  requirements in regard to the pursuit of knowledge in any field of higher  education including professional education and research;  Make regulations specifying appropriate norms, processes and  structures for accrediting universities and institutions of higher learning  and research;  Make regulations specifying transparent norms and processes for  establishing and winding up institutions of higher learning and  research;  Make regulations specifying sources, norms and related mechanisms for  financing universities and other institutions of higher learning and  research;  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  73  Make regulations specifying norms and related mechanisms for  transparent and accountable governance in universities and other  institutions of higher learning and research;  Monitor through an appropriate national data base all matters relating  to the standards of higher education including professional education  and research in any field of knowledge;  Present to the President, annually and such other times as the  Commission may deem fit, reports on the state of higher education and  research including professional education in all fields of knowledge in  the territory of India and its comparison with the state of higher  education and research in other countries;  Make in the report referred to in sub-clause (g) hereinabove  recommendations as to the measures that ought to be taken for  renovation and rejuvenation of higher education including professional  education; and such recommendations may include, but not be limited  to, a vision of higher education to be reflected in a curriculum  framework, norms and standards for grading or rating or otherwise  benchmarking universities, measures and norms as well as  mechanisms for developing requirements of different disciplines of  knowledge, norms and mechanisms for evaluating costs and price of  higher education including professional education, new policies for the  growth and strengthening of universities and other institutions of higher  learning and research, and recommendations in regard to the measures  to be taken to prevent malpractices, if any, in any activity relating to  universities and other institutions of higher learning and research;  Encourage through the creation of an enabling environment for  universities to become self-regulatory bodies for the maintenance of  standards of higher education and research;  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  74  Advise, when called upon to do so, the President or Union or State  Governments, as the case may be, on policies relating to higher  education including professional education and research in any field of  knowledge;  Develop policies and processes that would create an enabling  environment for eligible youth to take up teaching and research as  occupation and career;  Develop policies and processes that would enable qualitative and  meaningful interaction between students and teachers in universities  and other institutions of higher learning and research;  Develop measures required to lighten the work load of universities in  regard to their routine functions so that the quality of time available to  universities for research and teaching is meaningfully enhanced, and  such measures may include, but not limited to, schemes for gradually  enabling colleges affiliated to universities to be independent of such  affiliation;  Discharge such other functions in relation to the promotion,  coordination and maintenance of standards of higher education and  research including professional education as the President may subject  to the provisions of any law made by Parliament made in this behalf, by  rule specify.  (5) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House  of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or  proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and  the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such  recommendations.  (6) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter with  which any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  75  be forwarded to the Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid  before the Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining  the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations  relating to the State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of  any such recommendations.  (7) The Union and every State Government shall consult the Commission  on all major policy matters affecting higher education including  professional education and research.  (8) In this article, references to  Professional education, shall be construed as including technical,  medical, legal or any other professional education that Parliament may  by any law in this behalf specify;  Universities and institutions of higher learning and research shall be  construed as including all such institutions that Parliament may by any  law in this behalf specify.  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  76  C. Documents related to the evolution of the work of the Committee.  Date : 04.03.2009  Dear Arjun Singh ji,  I am submitting the draft interim report of the committee you had set up  through a notification on 28th of February 2008. You had given us a year.  The committee was originally supposed to review UGC/AICTE and various  other councils connected with higher education. Expressed, and the overall  implied hope was that we might be able to suggest ways of moving our  higher education to a more active and creative form. I also felt that engaging  with listing the limitations and faults of these two organizations would not  be very productive, besides being very limiting. We did not want to expend  our energies in suggesting minor and major modifications in their  structures; instead we decided to explore some basic aberrations in our  system that are generally ignored. Therefore, a few months down the line I  came to you to suggest that our task might be made broader; that we should  be asked to advise on “Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education”. I  was both pleased and overwhelmed that you conceded to my request. As you  would notice, the salient points of our report also meet the essence of the  earlier, more limited, task given to us.  We were struck by the fact that over the years we have followed policies of  fragmenting our educational enterprise into cubicles. We have overlooked  that new knowledge and new insights have often originated at the  boundaries of disciplines. We have tended to imprison disciplinary studies in  opaque walls. This has restricted flights of imagination and limited our  creativity. This character of our education has restrained and restricted our  young right from the school age and continues that way into college and  university stage. Most instrumentalities of our education harm the  potentiality of human mind for constructing and creating new knowledge. We  have emphasized delivery of information and rewarded capability of storing  information. This does not help in creating a knowledge society. This is  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  77  particularly vile at the university level because one of the requirements of a  good university should be to engage in knowledge creation – not just for the  learner but also for society as a whole.  It became clear to us, therefore, that overall regulating structure for all  higher education should be just one. This would imply that the UGC and  AICTE should be subsumed within that single Higher Education  Commission. There is no need for separate Councils for various areas and  the responsibilities of various existing councils should be changed to define  the floor exit qualifications of personnel who exit from the respective  institutions. Knowledge and curricular details would be determined by  appropriate universities under guidelines of appropriate structures set up by  various wings of Higher Education Commission. Some details about the  structure of the Higher Education Commission (HEC), various bodies  attached to it and other aspects are discussed in the report. (It might be  noted that the justification and role of the suggested HEC are different from  those proposed by the Knowledge Commission). We hope the Commission  proposed by us would also act as a facilitator and catalyst for joint programs  between different Universities and other institutions.  Let me point to some of the recommendations that have arisen from this way  of thinking. Our report comes at a time when there is a refreshing  seriousness about doing some thing ambitious and unprecedented in our  higher education. A large number of Central universities are being set up.  Also several Institutes of Technology, Management and other areas. During a  lot of discussion in this regard we have also talked of World-Class  Universities. We would like to point out that there are no great universities  in the world that do not simultaneously conduct world class programs in  science, astronomy, management, languages, comparative literature,  philosophy, psychology, information technology, law, political science,  economics, agriculture and many other emerging disciplines. Indeed the  emerging disciplines do their emerging because of infection or triggering by  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  78  other fields in the same university. That is the reason that such universities  are so great and our academics keep going to them. Our argument is that  they would not be great if they could not accommodate people from many  other disciplines. Put together, all the disciplines, breed value into each  other. If forced to stay in isolation from each other they would not have the  character demanded for greatness. It is our strong recommendation that the  new Universities, including those we call Indian Institutes of Technology – or  Management should have the character of such world-class universities.  Furthermore, the existing Institutes of Technology whose competence as  excellent undergraduate institutions we do recognize (also their brand name)  should be challenged to play a bigger role – for example similar to that of  great universities like the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) or  Caltech. In additions, like these great universities of the world they should  engage with a much wider universe of knowledge, both at undergraduate  and post graduate level.  We are also convinced that Indian higher education as whole cannot go far  without our paying equal attention to the State universities. They are also  Indian universities and a large fraction our students will continue to come  from them. Many of them are as good as our central institutions and should  be given a chance to fly. We should think seriously about the manner in  which the motivation and resources are enhanced all over the country.  In the end I would like to mention our deep concern in respect of two  matters.  Mushrooming engineering and management colleges, with some notable  exceptions, have largely become, mere business entities dispensing very poor  quality education. We have made some recommendations in this regard.  Deemed Universities have also mushroomed. Most of them do not belong to  the same class as recognized as such twenty years ago. This provision was  reserved for a few truly outstanding education and research institutions,  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  79  with a consideration that they would bring depth and variety into the  education system. We are seriously concerned about the character and value  of this growth and have made specific recommendations in this regard.  Finally, we would share with you the prevalent feeling in the universities that  there is too much inspection, interference and delay in their dealings with  state and central Governments. I am sure universities and colleges should  themselves some share some blame in this regard, but we need to move  away from this blame game. We have to devise somewhat different, more  efficient, funding management system. We have made some recommendation  in this regard. We would recommend that universities should become self-  regulating and partners in managing the overall education system.  Continuous monitoring and inspection causes delays and leads to  corruption. Some suggestions in this regard have also been made.  There is some more in the report and much more in the conversations and  discussions we have had during many interactions and visits.  We would like to expose this draft report to wider groups and come with a  final report by the end of April.  I thank all the members of the committee and many others. All these names  are mentioned at the end of the report. I would thank you for your  sympathetic understanding in agreeing to the modification of the name of  this committee to become consistent with somewhat deeper, and wider  approach of its work. I hope we have justified your confidence.  With warm regards,  Yours sincerely,  Yash Pal  dfsdgfhg Report of ‘The Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education’  80  CONFIDENTIAL  21.9.08  Dear Shri Arjun Singh ji,  You were kind enough to give me time to meet you about a week ago. We spent about an hour when I tried to brief you about the progress of the work of the committee you had asked me to chair. You would recall that right at the beginning of our work I had come to see you. I had mentioned that I do not want to be involved in a routine administrative exercise, but would be prepared to take on this responsibility only in an effort to go deep into the causes of the malaise in our education system, just like the work we did in connection with drafting a curriculum framework at school level – something that led to NCF-95. In fact some months earlier I had seen you to suggest that we needed a Freedom Movement in Higher Education and we need a think over the question of a curriculum Frame Work for higher education.  In our long meeting on the 14th of this month I briefed you about the way our work was preceding. I felt it necessary to do this to ensure that what we might finish with in a few months from now should not surprise you. I left a note with you and a request that the name our Committee should be changed to encompass the spirit of the work we are doing. I am copying both these notes below as a matter of record. While I am not assuming your complete concurrence with the direction we are taking, I was pleased that you were not visibly antagonistic towards my way of thinking. As I mentioned to you we would be in a position to present an interim report in a couple of months. I would be happy to do it in a meeting called by you, or as a Report to the Nation.  The two documents I mention above are attached. With warm regards and best wishes for your good health,  Your Sincerely,  Yash Pal