Funding higher education: policies for access and quality
House of Commons Education and Skills Committee
Post-16 student support
Session 2001-02
Nicholas Barr
Department of Economics,
London School of Economics and Political Science,
Houghton Street,
London WC2A 2AE, UK
Tel: +44-20-7955-7482; Fax: +44-20-7831-1840;
Email: N.Barr@lse.ac.uk;
http://econ.lse.ac.uk/staff/nb
'Funding Higher Education: Policies for Access and Quality', House of Commons, Education
and Skills Committee, Post-16 Student Support, Sixth Report of Session 2001-2002, HC445,
(TSO, 2002), pp. Ev 19-35.Contents
Executive summary
1 What we all agree about 1
2 Lessons from economic theory 2
3 Problems with current arrangements 4
3.1 The good news
3.2 The bad news
3.3 The worst news: interest subsidies
4 The policy strategy
4.1 Flexible fees
4.2 A wide-ranging income-contingent loan scheme
4.3 Active measures to promote access
4
5
8
13
13
14
18
5 Conclusion 20
Annex 1: The student support system before and after 1998 21
Annex 2: An unsubsidised interest rate: how much extra for graduates? 23
Annex 3: An open-ended graduate tax: problems but no solutions 24
Annex 4: Legal issues 26
References 28Executive summary
1.
This paper puts forward a strategy for achieving two objectives in higher education –
improved access and increased quality – about which there is unanimous agreement.
2.
D IAGNOSIS . The introduction of income-contingent repayments in 1998 was a genuine and
enormous advance. However, two strategic problems remain. First, income-contingency is little
understood, causing unnecessary fear of debt (solutions are discussed in section 4.2). Second, all the
funding problems of the current system go back – directly or indirectly – to the subsidised interest rate
on student loans. Australia and New Zealand face identical problems for identical reasons.
3.
Interest subsidies create three problems. They are badly-targeted, mainly benefiting high-
earning graduates in mid career. They are expensive (a recently-developed model estimates
conservatively that out of next year's lending to students of £2500 million about £700 million will
never come back because of interest subsidies). Third, because loans are so expensive, the Treasury
rations them. Thus interest subsidies, like most subsidies harm the people they are meant to help.
There was an experiment with subsidies called Communism. It did not work. The result is that loans
are too small, leading to student poverty and extensive use of credit card debt; and loans are means-
tested: thus parental contributions and upfront costs continue.
4.
P RESCRIPTION . If graduates pay an interest rate equal to the government's cost of borrowing
(not the bank overdraft rate), repayments increase from about 50% of total borrowing to about 85%
(the remaining 15% shortfall being mainly due to low lifetime earnings), largely eliminating the fiscal
impediment to expanding loans. The move is politically less difficult than it sounds. Interest rates are
currently low, so that a move to the government's cost of borrowing involves only a small increase to
the rate that graduates pay. Second, a graduate's monthly repayments depend only on her income;
thus an increase in interest rates has no effect on monthly repayments, instead affecting the duration of
the loan – making it clear that repayments are simply a form of targeted income tax.
5.
P OLICIES . Removing interest subsidies is the single essential key to solving current funding
problems. The considerable resources thereby released underwrite the strategy for quality and access
in section 4. The strategy has three mutually reinforcing elements: flexible fees, a wide-ranging loan
system and active measures to promote access.
6.
Flexible fees are necessary to reflect diversity, to arrest quality decline and to assist some
redistribution of teaching budget towards institutions with more remedial teaching. Specifically, fees
should be increased initially to £2000, but with institutions free to charge less. All fees should be
fully covered by a loan entitlement.
7.
A wide-ranging loan system.
• Loans should be adequate to cover living costs and tuition fees, making higher education free
at the point of use, thus addressing student poverty and freeing students from high-cost
borrowing such as overdrafts and credit card debt.
• Loan entitlement should become universal, eliminating the unpopular and complex income
test and, at a stroke, getting rid of parental contributions.
The combined effect of these twin elements is equivalent to bringing in universal grants in
combination with an income-related graduate contribution (section 4.2). Additional options include
extending loans to students in further education and to postgraduates.
8.
Active measures to promote access. There are two impediments to access – financial poverty
and information poverty. The strategy outlined in section 4.3 aims to address both.
•
•
•
•
Grants and scholarships for students from poor backgrounds.
Extra personal and academic support when students from poor backgrounds reach university.
Raising the aspirations of schoolchildren.
More resources earlier in the system, including financial support for 16-19 year olds.Funding higher education: policies for access and quality 1
Nicholas Barr 2
1.
This paper sets out a strategy for promoting access and strengthening quality. Though
explicitly about higher education, the arguments apply equally to the tertiary sector as a
whole. Successive sections discuss:
• The many things we all agree about.
• Lessons from economic theory.
• Problems with current arrangements, and key elements of solutions, including an
indication of the scale of the prize to be won.
• A policy strategy.
1 What we all agree about
2.
Since the finance of higher education is controversial, it is useful to start by setting
out some large areas of unanimous agreement.
3.
T HE PROBLEM . There is agreement, first, about two core problems:
• Students are poor because the system of support does not give them enough to live
on. Two results follow: students have to turn to expensive overdraft and credit-card
debt and/or to extensive part-time work; and the parsimony of support is an
impediment to access for people contemplating university.
• Universities are poor, creating worries about quality. The UK would have to spend
an extra £3.5 billion per year to reach the EU average.
4.
O BJECTIVES . There is also agreement – strong and universal agreement – about two
central objectives.
1
This paper draws on Barr (2001, Chs 10-14), and in part on work while a Visiting Scholar at the Fiscal Affairs
Department at the IMF in Spring 2000. It also draws on collaboration on policy design with Iain Crawford for
more years than either of us care to contemplate, on advice on factual matters and administrative feasibility from
Colin Ward and his team at the Student Loans Company, and on recent work by the three of us on a project
advising the Hungarian government. An earlier version was presented at a meeting of the Parliamentary
Universities Group.
2
Department of Economics, London School of Economics and Political Science, Houghton Street, London
WC2A 2AE, UK: Tel: +44-20-7955-7482; Fax: +44-20-7831-1840; Email: N.Barr@lse.ac.uk;
http://econ.lse.ac.uk/staff/nb• Improved access. The socioeconomic mix in higher education has barely changed in
40 years. Everyone supports widening participation in the interests of social justice,
and also for reasons of national economic performance.
• Improved quality. Again, there is no disagreement: the quality and diversity of higher
education is important for its own sake, and for national competitiveness.
5.
F OUR PROPOSITIONS . Resources are clearly key to achieving these objectives. To that
end, the discussion of resources throughout the paper is based on four propositions.
• UK higher education needs substantial additional funding for reasons of national
economic performance and because higher education is an important export industry.
• Funding on the necessary scale will not come from the taxpayer, given an ageing
population, rising health expenditure, competition from other parts of the education
sector and competitive global pressures.
• Reform will therefore be ineffective unless it can deliver an immediate and sustained
injection of private funding. The way to achieve this is through a student loan scheme
which can draw in private finance on fiscally attractive terms.
• Phasing out the interest subsidy on the current loan scheme is essential to that end.
Interest subsidies are costly (about one-third of total lending never comes back
because of their cost), distortionary and badly-targeted. Instead of paying an interest
rate equal to the rate of inflation (as currently), graduates should pay a rate equal to
the government's cost of borrowing (not the interest rate on bank overdrafts or credit
cards). The considerable savings would be much better used to expand the loan
system and for the explicit, targeted measures to promote access set out in section 4.3.
2 Lessons from economic theory
6.
Economic theory offers three strong sets of results, summarised here briefly. 3
7.
T HE DAYS OF CENTRAL PLANNING HAVE GONE , both for students and for higher
education institutions. The system should empower the individual choices of students and
potential students. The key theoretical question is whether students are well-informed or can
become well-informed. My answer is yes. The role of government is not to plan student
choices, but to make sure that students have easy access to timely, accurate and relevant
information and – particularly for students from poorer backgrounds – also to advice.
8.
The supply side should also be liberalised. Forty years ago, with an elite system, it
was possible, as a polite myth, to assume that all universities were equally good and hence
3
For fuller discussion, see Barr (2001, Chs 11 and 12).
Nicholas Barr April 2002
2could be funded broadly equally. Today we have a mass system, meaning more higher
education institutions, more students, and much greater diversity of subject matter – all
changes which are warmly to be welcomed. As a result, however, the characteristics and the
costs of different degrees at different institutions vary widely. Thus universities need to be
funded differentially. In principle this could be done by an all-knowing central planner. In
practice, the problem is too complex for that to be the sole mechanism. A mass system in an
increasingly complex world needs a funding mechanism which allows institutions to charge
differential prices to reflect their differential characteristics.
9.
Supply-side liberalisation is not only necessary; it is also desirable. Increased
competition between institutions will make them more responsive to student preferences.
Some students will wish to study full-time but on an accelerated basis, for example studying
for four terms per year rather than three; others, in contrast, will wish to study part-time, for
example through evening courses. A system which can offer students and prospective
students a wider range of choice is efficient; and the added option of part-time study while
continuing to work also assists access.
10.
G RADUATES SHOULD CONTRIBUTE TO THE COSTS OF THEIR DEGREES . A second strong
result from economic theory is that higher education should not be free – its costs should be
shared between the taxpayer and the graduate. There are two mutually reinforcing arguments.
11.
We cannot afford free higher education. The argument is simple. Forty years ago,
with a 5% participation rate it was fiscally feasible to rely mainly on public funding to
support a high-quality higher education system. The welcome expansion to a 35%
participation rate, with aspirations to a 50% rate, however, mean that public funding has to be
supplemented on a significant scale by private funding. This is all the more the case because:
12.
We should not have free higher education. It is well-known that graduates on average
have significantly higher earnings than non-graduates. The Dearing Report (National
Committee of Inquiry into Higher Education, 1997, para. 18.13) suggests that
'compared to those without higher education qualifications who were qualified to
enter higher education, those with higher education qualifications:
• have higher employment rates;
• enjoy higher salaries;
• enjoy an average private rate of return of some 11 to 14 per cent'.
13.
Since higher education creates social benefits it is right that there should always be a
taxpayer contribution. But given the robust evidence on private rates of return, excessive
reliance on public funding is inefficient. It is also regressive, and hence unjust, since the
major beneficiaries of free higher education are the predominantly middle-class participants.
Nicholas Barr April 2002
3A government committed to improving access should not spray scarce taxpayer pounds
indiscriminately across the entire student body but should instead target those resources on
people for whom access is most fragile.
14.
A WELL - DESIGNED STUDENT LOAN SCHEME HAS CORE FEATURES . The third set of
conclusions from economic theory sheds light on the design of student loans. Four features
stand out, summarised here only briefly (for fuller discussion, see Barr, 2001, Ch. 12).
• Income-contingent repayments, i.e. loans with repayments calculated as x% of the
graduate's subsequent earnings until she has repaid her loan, are fundamental. The
arguments are now well-understood. Income-contingent repayments instantly and
automatically respond to changes in earnings: people with low earnings make low
repayments; and people with low lifetime earnings do not repay in full. The effect is
to protect borrowers against excessive risk, with gains both in efficiency and in terms
of access (see also Barr and Crawford, 1997, evidence to this Committee).
• Large enough to cover all living costs and all tuition fees. This feature makes higher
education free at the point of use – the important advance made by the Cubie
arrangements in Scotland. Students are no longer pushed towards expensive credit-
card debt; and parental contributions can be abolished, a liberation both for students
and their parents.
• An unsubsidised interest rate, as explained in section 3.3, is essential for fiscal
reasons, for efficiency reasons, and in the interests of access.
• A capacity to bring in private funds. Student loans bring in private funding through
students' subsequent repayments. However, there is a net saving to the taxpayer only
when the scheme is mature, i.e. when the inflow of repayments from earlier cohorts of
students matches or exceeds the outgoings to this year's borrowers. That process takes
15-20 years. If extra resources are needed immediately, it is desirable to have a loan
scheme which brings in private money upfront, creating an immediate injection of
private finance.
3 Problems with current arrangements 4
3.1 The good news
15.
Income-contingent loans, with repayments collected alongside income tax, were
introduced for UK students starting their degrees in or after 1998. This move represents
unambiguous progress and deserves loud applause.
4
For assessment of systems of higher education finance in other countries (the USA, Australia, New Zealand,
the Netherlands and Sweden), see Barr (2001, Ch. 13). National Audit Office (2002) reaches very similar
conclusions about the problems of the present system, in particular its failure to improve access.
Nicholas Barr April 2002
43.2 The bad news
16.
That, however, exhausts the good news. The problems described below were both
predictable and predicted, e.g. Barr and Crawford (1997) in evidence to this Committee.
S TUDENT SUPPORT : IMPEDIMENTS TO ACCESS
17.
The system of student support impedes access in several ways.
18.
D EFICIENT LOAN DESIGN . The current scheme conforms with only one of the four
criteria – income-contingent repayments – in para. 14. It fails the remaining three badly.
• The loan is too small to cover living costs; it is income tested, so that not all students
are entitled to a full loan; and there is no loan to cover tuition fees. Thus the system
incorporates upfront charges, students remain poor, and parental contributions
continue. All these features impede access.
• The loan incorporates an interest subsidy. The resulting problems are discussed in
detail in section 3.3.
• The scheme is capable of bringing in private finance but, because of the interest
subsidy, only on fiscally unattractive terms, again, discussed further below.
19.
C ONTINUED RELIANCE ON PARENTAL
contributions merit additional discussion.
CONTRIBUTIONS .
The problems of parental
• As a philosophical matter, is it right to force young adults to depend on their parents?
• Student poverty: the scale and volume of unpaid contributions is well known. 5
• Impediments to access: unpaid contributions cause some students to drop out, and the
threat of unpaid contributions deters an unknown number of others from applying in
the first place.
• Distorted choices: in other cases, parents pay the contribution, but with conditions
attached: 'we will pay, but only if you do a sensible subject.'
• The previous three problems all have troubling gender and ethnic aspects, and the
point is, if anything, even stronger in respect of spouse contributions.
5
Barr and Low (1988), using data for 1982/3, found that about half of students entitled to parental contribution
received less than they were supposed to, and the shortfall was substantial: students whose parents gave them
less than the system supposed received only £53 of every £100 of assessed parental contribution. As a result,
one student in thirteen remained below the poverty line even when income from all sources was included.
Subsequent work based on 1992/3 data found that 37 per cent of students received less than the assessed
parental contribution (Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals (1996, p. 14), quoting an official survey).
Callender and Kemp (2000, p. 3) report that 'By 1998/9, the proportion of students who failed to receive their
full assessed parental contribution had doubled to three in ten students. The mean shortfall for these students
(average assessed contribution minus average actual parental contribution) was £719'
Nicholas Barr April 2002
5•
The income test necessary to assess parental contributions is intrusive and has high
compliance and administrative costs.
20.
Its gets worse! Assessment of family income has to take account of whether a student
is making maintenance payments (a deduction from his assessable income) or is the recipient
of maintenance payments (which may be an addition to his assessable income) (Department
of Education and Skills, 2001, Ch. 6, paras 54-58). And the relevance of a spouse's income
raises the vexed issue of cohabitation: a woman whose husband has a high salary is not
entitled to a full loan; nor is one whose partner has a high income – but that requires finding
out whether or not a student is cohabiting. Paras B117-8 of the guidance notes just cited are
titled 'Advice on identifying a cohabiting couple'. Such factors – which should lie wholly
outside the system of student support – are an inescapable concomitant of an income test.
21.
None of this is an attack on family support: where families wish to help, such support
should be applauded. The attack is twofold. Policy should not be based on an assumption that
parents will support their children. Such an assumption may, at a stretch, have been valid for
an elite system of higher education, regarded as a luxury good for middle-class families; it is
invalid for mass higher education as an investment good, and totally inapplicable to
expanding access. The policy is bad also because it forces students into dependence on
parental contributions or spouse contributions, since there is no option to take out a larger
loan in place of unpaid contributions.
22.
C OMPLEXITY . Annex 1 gives a very simplified explanation of the current system. But
student support in practice is so complex that nobody fully understands the system. 6 Someone
from a poor background pays no tuition fee and is entitled to a full loan. The assessment of a
student's financial position is based on parental income for a younger student, or on his or her
spouse's or partner's income. Parental or spouse income has two effects: as income rises, the
tuition fee rises; once the fee has reached its maximum (£1,075 in 2001/2), the effect of
additional parental income is to reduce the size of the loan to which the student is entitled. All
students, however rich their parents or spouse, are entitled to a loan equal to about 75 per cent
of the maximum loan except that scholarship and similar income, if high enough, can reduce
loan entitlement below that 75 per cent minimum. 7 Such complexity has major ill-effects:
students, prospective students, and their parents cannot understand the system; it is a
nightmare to administer; and complexity, per se, impedes access.
6
Without wishing to seem frivolous, I challenge Committee members to explain the operation of the income-
test by which a student's loan entitlement and tuition fee are assessed, as set out in the guidance notes from the
Department for Education and Skills (2001) to the Local Education Authorities, who administer the income test
(http://www.dfes.gov.uk/studentsupport/ss_admin/content/dsp_section_29.shtml, Chapter 6).
7
Originally, a student's loan entitlement was reduced pound for pound with any scholarship income in excess of
£1000 per year. The disregard was subsequently increased; in 2001/2 it is £4000 (Department for Education
and Skills, 2001, Table 5).
Nicholas Barr April 2002
623.
I NADEQUATE DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION . Perhaps the greatest impediment to
access is the fact that the wider public totally fails to understand income-contingent
repayments. The scale of this ignorance cannot be exaggerated. Most people are completely
unaware that loan repayments are de facto a form of income tax – but paid only by graduates
and switched off once the graduate has repaid what he or she borrowed. In this respect, the
Government is deeply culpable over its negligence in vigorously and repeatedly explaining
this point. The resulting ignorance unnecessarily aggravates debt aversion and is a further
impediment to access. The topic is taken up in detail in paras 63-73.
U NIVERSITIES :
24.
IMPEDIMENTS TO QUALITY
The post-Dearing arrangements are also bad news on the supply side.
25.
C ONTINUED CENTRAL PLANNING . The strong theoretical case against central planning
of higher education was alluded to earlier. Though nobody quarrels with the need for
universities to be publicly and transparently accountable, there are few defenders of the
particular mechanisms, of which the QAA and RAE are only the tip of the iceberg. In
addition, there has been central control of the number of students at each university and of
tuition fees – in other words, both price and quantity were determined by the central planner
– a situation only partly eased by the proposed lifting of the numbers cap.
26.
Such planning impedes quality. Also – and entirely unintended – it impedes access to
UK students to the best universities. Again, this was predicted to this Committee:
'A flat fee will continue the erosion of quality at the best universities, which face the
biggest shortfalls. If this policy continues, the result will be to deprive British
students of the chance of an internationally cutting-edge undergraduate degree in one
of two ways. The quality of the best institutions might fall; British students could still
get places, but the quality of the degree would be less. Alternatively, the best
institutions will largely stop teaching British undergraduates (for whom they receive
on average £4000 per year) and will use the fees from foreign undergraduates (around
£8000 per year) to preserve their excellence. The government is considering trying to
prevent British universities from charging additional fees to UK/EU students. Again,
this is done for equity reasons; again, it ends up harming the very people it is aimed at
helping, in this case by creating a situation where British students will find it harder
and harder to get places at the best universities' (Barr and Crawford, 1997, para. 57).
27.
I NADEQUATE UNIVERSITY INCOME . The immediate post-Dearing arrangements
brought universities not an extra penny, for the reasons explained in Barr and Crawford
(1997), with worrying effects on quality. The story in 1997, in a nutshell, was as follows:
Nicholas Barr April 2002
7(a) Public spending on higher education would not go up (the budget said so).
(b) Parental contributions (i.e. private spending) would not go up (the Secretary of State
said so). 8
(c) Loans to students (the other potential source of private spending) counted in their
entirety as public spending.
28.
There has been some improvement since 1997. Public spending under (a) has
increased; debt sales have brought in some private money under (c); and the move from
cash-flow to resource accounting has further assisted under (c). These developments are all
genuinely welcome; but they do not change the reality that, at its core, the system continues
to be publicly funded; and given its greater political salience, student support has crowded
out university income. The story in Australia is exactly the same (see Annex 3, para. 95), and
for exactly the same underlying reason – the interest subsidy on student loans.
3.3 The worst news: interest subsidies
T HE PROBLEM
29. It is important to understand the scale of the problems that interest subsidies cause.
30. W HAT INTEREST RATE ? First, it is important to be clear what I am not saying:
• At present graduates pay an interest rate equal to the rate of inflation. Press
discussion of 'market interest rates' evokes worries about high interest rates associated
with credit cards and overdrafts. That is not what is meant. The interest rate which
graduates should pay on their loans is the government's cost of borrowing, i.e. broadly
the interest rate the Monetary Policy Committee announces.
• The attack is on blanket interest subsidies. A strong case can be made for targeted
interest subsidies – for example someone who is unemployed or caring for young
children or other dependants – to make sure that their debt does not spiral upwards.
Mechanisms for such targeted assistance are discussed in section 4.2.
31.
W HY ARE INTEREST SUBSIDIES SUCH A PROBLEM ? Interest subsidies are:
•
Regressive. As explained in paras 42 and 43, interest subsidies do not benefit students
(who do not make repayments), nor low-earning graduates, but better-off graduates in
mid-career.
8
‘Today the Government announce a new deal for higher education, involving new funding for universities and
colleges, free higher education for the less well-off, no parent having to pay more than at present and a fair
system of repayment linked to ability to pay' (Hansard (Commons), 23 July 1997, col. 949) (emphasis added).
‘Our response to Dearing ensures that fees and maintenance together do not place an increased burden on
middle-income families' (ibid., col. 950).
Nicholas Barr April 2002
8• Expensive. Interest subsidies are enormously costly. Evidence from debt sales
suggests that of all the money lent to students, about one-third never comes back
because of the cost of interest subsidies. The scale of the resulting losses is discussed
shortly. The high fiscal costs of loans create two further sets of ill-effects.
• Inimical to quality. Expensive student support crowds out university income; thus
interest subsidies conflict directly with improved quality.
• Distortionary. Because loans are so expensive, the Treasury rations them. Thus
interest subsidies, like most subsidies, create shortages – like rent control, they end up
harming the very people they were meant to help. There was an experiment with
price subsidies called Communism. It did not work.
32.
In the case of loans, shortages manifest themselves in the following ways:
• The full loan is too small to cover a student's living costs, leading to student poverty.
• Loans are means-tested: as a result parental/spouse/partner contributions continue,
and higher education involves upfront costs and charges.
• Loans are restricted, for example are not available to students in further education
(impeding access), nor to postgraduates (putting national competitiveness at risk).
T OWARDS A SOLUTION :
THE SCALE OF THE PRIZE
33.
In short, interest subsidies create a fiscal black hole which aggravates problems both
of access and quality. 9 A move to an unsubsidised rate is not just a technicality – it is the
single essential key to solving current problems of funding tertiary education. The
considerable resources thereby released underwrite the array of major policy advances set out
in section 4.
9
Other countries are reaching a similar conclusion. New Zealand, having flirted with interest subsidies since
2000, are contemplating reversing that short-lived, ill-advised experiment. A government report published last
November, concluded that:
'Participation goals should continue to be supported through a Student Loan Scheme with income-contingent
repayments as at present. The Commission believes, however, that the current policy of writing off interest on
loans for full-time and low-income students while they are studying is not an effective use of the government's
resources. While this policy has decreased the length of time taken to repay loans after graduation, it has also
led to an increase in the number of students taking out loans and in the overall level of student debt. To
compound matters, the policy has made it possible for learners to borrow money and invest it for private gain
(arbitrage). Consequently, the Commission believes that this policy should be discontinued - or that, as a
minimum, the incentives for arbitrage should be removed. Any savings accruing to the government as a result
of modifying the current loan scheme should be reinvested in the tertiary education system and be used for the
benefit of students' (New Zealand Tertiary Education Advisory Committee, 2001, p. 14).
Nicholas Barr April 2002
934.
H OW MUCH EXTRA MONEY ? Suppose graduates pay an interest rate equal to the
government's cost of borrowing rather than, as now, the inflation rate. 10 Do the resulting
savings make the move worthwhile?
35.
Barr and Falkingham (1993, 1996), using LIFEMOD, a microsimulation model, found
that for every 100 the government lends, only about 50 is repaid. Of the missing 50, 20 is not
repaid because of fraud, early death, and emigration (all of which have a relatively small
effect), and mainly because some graduates have low lifetime earnings and so never repay
their loan in full, and 30 is not repaid because of the interest subsidy. In other words, the
interest subsidy converts nearly one-third of the loan into a grant.
36.
Previous sales of student debt offer independent evidence. The debt was sold for
about 50 pence per pound of its face value. Official estimates suggest that of the missing 50
pence about 15 pence was because of low lifetime income, etc., and 35 pence because of the
interest subsidy. The evidence on the interest subsidy is compelling. The government did not
use LIFEMOD; thus the official estimates and the simulation results reinforce each other.
37.
A recent modelling exercise 11 offers further confirmation. The model is conservative
in at least two ways. First, it assumes that the subsidised interest rate is 2.5%, the
unsubsidised rate 5%, thus implicitly assuming that the real rate will stay as low as 21⁄2%
throughout the lifetime of the loan. Second, the accounting of debt forgiveness is on an
accruals basis, even though forgiveness normally occurs only at the end of the loan period. 12
The model takes as its starting point projected loan outgoings for the next academic year of
£2,500 million. 13 With debt forgiveness of 15% (i.e. assuming that 15% of student borrowing
will never be repaid because of low lifetime earnings, etc.), 14 a move to an interest rate equal
to the government's cost of borrowing would release sustainable savings of £700 million per
10
Charging a market interest rate on income-contingent loans raises issues under the Consumer Credit Act.
Solutions to the problem are outlined in Annex 4.
11
The model was originally developed by the Chief Executive of the Student Loans Company as part of a joint
LSE/SLC project advising the Hungarian Government, and has been adapted to simulate alternatives to the UK
system.
12
The calculations assume that a portion of the total debt forgiveness occurs each year, when repayments are
due. This gives a higher assessment of the cost of forgiveness than one which reflects the real life position,
where the level of forgiveness is known only at the end of the repayment period. The cost is higher because
discounting for the loss of purchasing power over time is greater in the earlier years of repayment. The approach
was adopted because it represents the most punitive accounting approach that can be taken for costs, depending
on the resource accounting policy applied by the Treasury.
13
This is the forecast figure for 2002-3 including income-contingent loans, mortgage loans and hardship loans
(the latter two being small). The outturn for 2000-1 was £1840 million, the forecast for 2001-2, £2282 million.
14
New Zealand, with longer experience of income-contingent repayments, uses an official estimate of 10% in its
public accounts.
Nicholas Barr April 2002
10year. 15 That sum could be used to finance additional grants and scholarships of up to £700
million. Alternatively, it could be used to underwrite an expanded loan system; with 15%
debt forgiveness, it would be possible nearly to triple the total amount of lending. Or the sum
could be used for a combination of the two policies.
38.
W HEN WILL THE MONEY BE AVAILABLE ? It is necessary at this stage to distinguish the
cash-flow costs of loans (i.e. the money which is required now, but which will eventually be
repaid), from the fiscal costs (i.e. borrowing which will never be repaid). With the present
loan scheme, for each 100 that students borrow (the cash-flow cost), roughly 50 will never be
repaid (the fiscal cost). The argument above is that eliminating interest subsidies reduces the
fiscal cost of loans from about 50% to about 15%. Though the Treasury will, of course, take
cognisance of cash-flow costs, the abolition of interest subsidies makes it possible to have a
loan system that is larger, but at the same time has smaller fiscal costs.
39.
Seen through the eyes of the Treasury, £700 million is the present value of the annual
saving, and is thus a significant and sustainable long-run resource. Seen through the eyes of
the Department for Education and Skills, however, the initial savings in cash-flow terms are
small. 16 But higher education needs to benefit immediately from the long-run savings. That
will require a deal between the Treasury and the Department for Education and Skills for an
early injection of additional resources. One way to finance such a deal is by selling a further
tranche of student debt, which could yield up to £2 billion. For the reasons explained in the
previous paragraph, such a deal makes sense in both educational and fiscal terms.
40.
Ensuring low fiscal costs is, of course essential. Once that is done, the Treasury can
choose how to deal with the cash flow costs of the loan system. It could do so out of taxation:
under resource accounting, the fiscal costs (i.e. lending that is not expected to come back)
appears as current education spending, while expected repayments appear in the capital
account as a financial asset. 17 With the present loan scheme, about half of lending to students
is counted as spending out of the education budget. If there were no interest subsidy, only
15%, or so, of total lending would appear as current education spending, and the 85%
expected repayment would appear in the capital account.
15
The gross annual saving from a move to an unsubsidised interest rate is £X million, considerably larger than
£700 million. The figure of £700 million is the answer to the following question: the government wants to
finance grants by selling bonds which are repaid after n years, where n is commensurate with the maximum
duration of the student loan; if repayments, including interest, over n years is £X million, what is the maximum
face value of the bonds? The answer is £700 million – the amount that can be spent on grants allowing for the
cost of financing those grants. Thus the figure is a very conservative one.
16
To oversimplify, if the interest rate students pay rises by 2.5%, the extra interest in year 1 is 2.5% x £2500
million, i.e. £62.5 million. In year 2, the saving in cash-flow terms are double that sum, in year 3 triple, etc.
17
Resource accounting has been introduced in the UK only recently. For a description of the way student loans
are treated in the public accounts in New Zealand, which has had resource accounting for longer, see Barr
(1997), evidence to this Committee.
Nicholas Barr April 2002
1141.
Alternatively, the Treasury could deal with the upfront cash flow costs by bringing in
private money to finance the scheme. This can be done in various ways. The debt-sale
approach has been extensively discussed (Barr and Falkingham 1993, 1996). There has been
less exploration of front-end funding, which has two variants. With retail lending, individual
students borrow from private lenders; thus student borrowing is individualized. With
wholesale lending, the loans administration borrows private money in tranches of (say) £2
billion, which it then lends to students. 18
42.
G RASPING THE NETTLE . The scale of the prize is clearly enormous. But political
worries about raising interest rates persist. These, however, should not be exaggerated.
• There is already growing support for removing interest subsidies (e.g. Piatt and
Robinson, 2001).
• Interest rates are currently low; thus the interest rate would have rise by no more than
21⁄2 per cent from the rate in the current loan scheme.
• A person's monthly repayments depend only on her income; thus interest rates have
no effect on monthly repayments, but only on the duration of repayment. Once such a
scheme has been introduced, this feature will become obvious to graduates.
• The wider public should understand who benefits from interest subsidies. Interest
subsidies do not help students (it is not students who make loan repayments, but
graduates); they do not help low-earning graduates, since unpaid debt is forgiven
after 25 years; they do not help higher-earning graduates early in their careers (since
monthly repayments are a fraction of earnings, and so are not affected by the interest
rate); the only people they help are higher-earning graduates in mid career, whose
loan repayments are switched off earlier because of the interest subsidies than would
be the case without the subsidies.
43.
I N SUM .
• Interest subsidies are targeted with exquisite accuracy: they benefit successful
professionals in mid career. Thus the NUS position, defending interest subsidies, is
arguing for continued subsidies for those who need it least at a time when they need it
least, and the hell with today's struggling inner-city sixth-formers.
• Removing the interest subsidy finances policies to promote access and quality, thus
helping students rather than graduates. The proposal is not to eliminate subsidies, but
to replace blanket (i.e. untargeted) subsidies by targeted interventions.
18
There has been extensive development work on front-end funding (see Barr, 2001, Ch. 14). The result is not
just academic theory, but has been extensively tested with the IMF, Eurostat, and financial market actors.
Nicholas Barr April 2002
12•
Income-contingent loans are simply a form of income-tax; and income-tax, together
with a write-off after 25 years, bases loan repayments on outcomes, and hence targets
subsidies accurately on graduates with low lifetime earnings.
Once students and their parents come to understand these point, their worries and, with them,
much of the political hullabaloo, will recede – an issue discussed in detail in paras 63-73.
4 The policy strategy
44.
This section sets out a strategy for access and quality with three elements:
• flexible fees, to address the quality issue, and to begin to free universities from
unnecessary central planning;
• a wide-ranging loan scheme to empower choice for the generality of students;
• wide-ranging but targeted measures to promote access; these need to start early in the
school system.
45.
The three elements are a strategy, not just a bunch of ad hoc policies: they are
designed to achieve explicit objectives, and the elements are mutually reinforcing. This does
not mean that the policies below must be swallowed whole, but does mean that attempts
indiscriminately to pick and mix will fail to achieve the policy's objectives.
4.1 Flexible fees
46.
A MEDIUM - TERM AIM . Flexible fees are both necessary and desirable for at least three
reasons.
47.
To address diversity. Historically, with a small tertiary system and a limited range of
subjects, it was possible for central planners to determine funding levels for different
institutions. Today, however, the higher education system is large, diverse and complex. As
a result, (a) the necessary variation in funding is much greater than formerly and (b) the
problem is now too complex for a central planner to have the sole power of decision about
how resources should be divided between institutions. Thus institutions should have the
freedom to set their own fee levels (that freedom could be constrained).
48.
To arrest quality decline. Without higher fees, quality will continue to be eroded and,
given flat fees, eroded most at the best institutions.
49.
To prevent crowding out. At present, the best institutions tend to receive more
funding for teaching in an attempt to protect their quality. This risks crowding out
universities with a different mission. With higher fees, the best institutions could paddle their
Nicholas Barr April 2002
13own canoes to a greater extent than currently, freeing resources for institutions which have to
do more remedial teaching. Thus – an important and poorly-understood point – flexible fees
benefit all tertiary institutions.
50.
A RGUMENTS THAT DO NOT STAND UP are of two sorts. It is sometimes argued that
students should pay the full costs of tuition. That argument overlooks the significant (albeit
hard-to-quantify) external benefits of higher education. There is a strong case for continuing
taxpayer subsidy for tuition for all students. Other people argue the opposite – that tertiary
education should be entirely funded from taxation. There may be a case for that policy for
sub-university education, but, applied to higher education, the argument is flawed. The
argument that university education should be free at the point of use (which I support), does
not mean that there should be no charges. Free tuition is expensive, and its benefits accrue
disproportionately to people from better-off backgrounds, who go on to be among the best-
off. Thus free tuition is badly targeted; the money could do much more for access if spent in a
way that directed resources specifically at those groups for whom access is most fragile and
those who do not benefit financially from their degrees. Lowering tuition charges for higher
education in other countries has not improved access. Conversely, introducing the Higher
Education Contribution Scheme in Australia in 1989, with tuition charges paid via an
income-contingent loan, did not harm access (Chapman 1997).
51.
H OW HIGH SHOULD THE FEE BE ? Taxpayer support plus tuition fees should cover the
costs of teaching. At research-intensive universities, fees should be higher to the extent of the
value-added in teaching by research-active people, but should not cross-subsidise research.
52.
P ITFALLS TO AVOID . Though flexible fees are desirable, there should be no 'big bang'
liberalisation. As a first step, the flat fee should be increased to £2000. 19 However,
institutions should be free to charge less if they wish, and the ceiling should be raised over
time. As indicated below, any increase in the ceiling should be accompanied by an equal
increase in the loan entitlement.
4.2 A wide-ranging income-contingent loan scheme
53.
The second element in the strategy is a wide-ranging loan scheme. Discussion starts
with policy options and then turns to a much-neglected aspect of loans – how to make sure
that the public understands the nature of the beast.
P OLICY OPTIONS
54.
As explained in section 2, a well-designed loan scheme has four characteristics:
income-contingent repayments; sufficient to cover all living costs and all tuition fees; with
19
See, similarly, Piatt and Robinson (2001) and Council for Industry and Higher Education (2001).
Nicholas Barr April 2002
14an interest rate equal to the government's cost of borrowing; and capable of bringing in
private funds. A loan scheme of this sort opens up the following options.
55.
U NIVERSAL . If there is no interest subsidy there is no need to ration loans, which can
therefore be made available as a universal entitlement. The administratively complex and
politically unpopular means test disappears; so does the relevance of such factors as whether
a student is married or cohabiting.
56.
A DEQUATE . For the same reason, the loan entitlement can be large enough to cover
realistic living costs and all tuition fees. 20 A universal, adequate loan has major advantages.
• It eliminates student poverty.
• It makes higher education free at the point of use.
• It makes it possible to abolish parental contributions.
• It frees students from forced reliance on expensive credit card debt and/or the need for
extensive part-time work, and thus in substantial measure addresses the worries of
middle-class students and their parents, and also the (rightful) complaints by the NUS
about the amount of high-cost student debt.
• It is simple for students and their parents to understand.
• It is vastly simpler to administer than current arrangements, since the administratively
cumbersome and unpopular means test can be abolished.
There is no need to belabour the helpful political resonances of all these features.
57.
E XTENDING LOANS TO OTHER GROUPS OF STUDENTS . The scheme could be extended to
postgraduate students, starting to address worries about research capacity and national
productivity. It could also become a universal entitlement throughout tertiary education,
buttressing existing sketchy student support for further education and vocational training,
thus contributing to access.
58.
P ROTECTING LOW EARNERS is a clear priority. Income-contingent repayments do so
automatically, since low earners make low repayments, and people with low lifetime earnings
do not repay in full. Nevertheless, many people are afraid of rising debt, and interest
subsidies were introduced to assuage those fears. As argued earlier, however, interest
subsidies are a costly, non-transparent and ineffective way of promoting access, and benefit
exactly the wrong people. The policies below are more transparent and better targeted ways
of protecting low earners.
20
Extending loans to cover tuition fees raises issues under EU legislation. These are discussed in Annex 4.
Nicholas Barr April 2002
1559.
Scholarships, i.e. grants which do not carry an obligation to make income-contingent
repayments.
60.
Stopping repayments after 25 years. Scholarships help people at the start of the
process. Complete debt forgiveness after (say) 25 years helps them at the end of the process.
61.
Targeted interest subsidies based on current income. It is also possible to help people
during the process. Under the simplest mechanism, anyone receiving a credit for national
insurance contributions – someone who is unemployed or looking after young children –
receives an interest subsidy. As an extension (as in New Zealand), anyone whose earnings
are so low that his or her income-contingent repayment fails to cover the interest element,
similarly receives an interest subsidy.
62.
Conditional subsidies. The mechanism in the previous paragraph protects low earners
and people with career breaks. However, some of the subsidies benefit people who
subsequently have high earnings. Thus there are advantages in terms of fiscal cost and
targeting to have a system which pays interest subsidies based on current income, but with a
facility to claw back the subsidy element for people who end up with high lifetime income.
A workable such scheme has been designed, which the Student Loans Company could
administer without difficulty. Such a scheme has major advantages: it gives assistance at the
time they need it to people with low income and/or with a career break, facilitating access
and preventing people from worrying that their repayment obligation is spiralling upwards;
but it is cost free, since the clawback mechanism ensures that only the lifetime poor keep the
subsidy. It is also flexible: it would, for example, be possible to give conditional subsidies to
some groups (e.g. someone who went travelling after graduation), but unconditional subsidies
to others (e.g. someone looking after young children or elderly dependants – analogous to
current proposals to assist teachers with their loan repayments).
U NDERSTANDING INCOME CONTINGENCY : SOME EQUIVALENCE PROPOSITIONS
63.
Past failures adequately to explain income-contingent loans has created unnecessary
disquiet. Medical practitioners sometimes talk about 'the worried well' – people who are in
good health, but whose life is made less happy by misplaced worries that they are not well.
Analogously, it can be argued, 'worried debtors' are concerned that student loans will be a
millstone. Students perceive a large debt, but miss two important points of context. First,
repayments are merely an addition to their future income tax. Thus the risk they take is no
different from the risk we all face that at some time in the future the basic rate of income tax
might increase (I am old enough to remember a 33% basic rate). Second, they do not see
how much they will pay over the years in income tax or national insurance contributions, nor
what they will spend on food (or drink) over a 25-year period. None of these items cause
people to worry, despite the fact that someone who starts on average earnings and remains on
Nicholas Barr April 2002
16average earnings all his working life, will pay nearly £300,000 21 in income tax and national
insurance contributions over a 35-year career, a topic discussed more fully in Annex 2.
64.
Alongside the policy design in the previous paragraphs, it is thus imperative to
explain what is going on. I am not at this stage digressing into political presentation, but
want instead to point out some analytical equivalences which should inform explanation.
65.
The following schemes are all analytically identical.
66.
S CHEME 1: AN INCOME - CONTINGENT LOAN . Earlier discussion described an income-
contingent loan, for which graduates make repayments of x% of their earnings until they have
repaid the loan at an interest rate equal to the government's cost of borrowing. What has been
missing thus far in government action is a clear explanation that a person's loan repayments
are, in effect, a form of income tax: a person's repayments track changes in his or her
earnings instantly and automatically, and thus nobody repays more than he or she can afford.
67.
The point is fundamental. Suppose we start from the argument (NUS, etc.) that
higher education should be paid out of taxation. But that means that the costs of higher
education are paid by the generality of income recipients, including low earners, non-
graduates, pensioners, and the like. It is widely acknowledged that this is unfair. To deal with
that unfairness, some people have argued that higher education should be financed through a
graduate tax, which can be thought of as additional income tax, but paid only by the
beneficiaries of higher education. But a graduate tax has its own unfairness, since people
with high lifetime earnings repay considerably more than they have borrowed (this is true of
any successful professional, without having to refer to extreme cases like Mick Jagger or
Stelios Haji-Ioannou). 22 To address the latter problem, it is suggested that a graduate tax
should not have an indefinite duration, but should be capped, i.e. 'switched off' once a person
has repaid an agreed contribution towards the costs of his/her degree. An income-contingent
loan is exactly that – it is a graduate tax which is capped at 100% of the initial sum borrowed.
Put another way, the only difference between a graduate tax and an income-contingent loan is
the duration of repayment: with a graduate tax, repayment lasts (say) 25 years, regardless of
how much a person has borrowed or repaid; with an income-contingent loan the duration of
repayment bears an exact relation to the initial amount borrowed.
68.
Thus income-contingent repayments can be described as repayment of debt. But with
equal accuracy they can be described as a form of targeted income tax – targeted by being
imposed only on graduates and by being 'switched off' once the loan has been repaid. This is
21
In today's prices, assuming annual real earnings growth of 21⁄2%.
22
As explained in Annex 3, a graduate tax has problems in addition to being unfair: it leads inescapably to
continued reliance on public funding; it is a hypothecated tax; and it raises difficult boundary problems.
Nicholas Barr April 2002
17a form of taxation that is more efficient and fairer than funding via the entire body of
taxpayers.
69.
S CHEME 2: FREE HIGHER EDUCATION (C UBIE ). If loans are universal and adequate to
cover all living costs and all tuition fees, higher education is free at the point of use. Thus the
system can be described as free higher education, paid for by a targeted income tax or a
graduate contribution. To repeat, the only difference from tax funding is that (a) the tax is
paid only by those who have been to university and (b) the additional tax is capped.
70.
S CHEME 3: UNIVERSAL GRANTS PLUS A GRADUATE CONTRIBUTION . Suppose that all
students receive a grant large enough to cover their living costs and tuition fees; and suppose
that the system is financed by an extra x pence in the pound added to a person's income tax
rate. The contribution does not go on for ever: it is 'switched off' once a person has
contributed an amount equal to the grant he/she received; and nobody pays for more than
(say) 25 years. Thus the scheme is simple: there is a universal grant, financed by a graduate
contribution payable for a maximum of 25 years, but for some people a shorter time.
71.
Two additional points specify the scheme precisely:
• The duration of the graduate contribution bears an exact relation to the amount of
grant a student has received. Though administratively complex, this is precisely the
task that the Student Loans Company currently performs: higher earners repay their
grant more quickly; lower earners take longer and are further protected in the ways
outlined in paras. 58-62; and nobody makes contributions for more than 25 years.
• Students for whom access is fragile are helped in the ways set out immediately below.
The scholarships and other forms of financial help they receive do not make them
liable for a graduate contribution.
72.
Since the three schemes are equivalent, any is an accurate description of the system of
student support. If this were better understood – particularly the very close relation of
income-contingent repayments to tax funding – the problem of the 'worried well' would be
greatly diminished.
73.
A point in conclusion: the equivalence arguments in the previous paragraphs are
analytical and should be judged on the quality of their logic. They are not presentational
arguments based on logical thin ice.
4.3 Active measures to promote access
74.
Income-contingent loans measure ability to pay on the basis of where a person ends
up, i.e. his or her subsequent income. This is the best approach for students from better-off
Nicholas Barr April 2002
18backgrounds, who are generally well-informed about the benefits of tertiary education.
However, students from socially-excluded backgrounds are typically badly informed.
Precisely for that reason, a wide range of additional measures to promote access – the third
leg of the strategy – is necessary.
75.
Put another way, it is not only financial poverty which impedes access, but also
information poverty. Any strategy for access therefore needs two elements:
• those which involve money, and
• those which involve information and raising aspirations.
The following are no more than indications of the scale of necessary actions.
76.
G RANTS AND SCHOLARSHIPS IN HIGHER EDUCATION . Money measures include
scholarships for students from poor backgrounds. They could be based on parental income,
but should also include money for schools and universities to award to students from poor
backgrounds. There should be financial incentives to universities to widen participation; and
universities would, in any case, wish to gather resources for scholarships to enable them to
recruit the brightest students, regardless of their financial background.
77.
For some students the biggest hurdle is to realise that they are good enough to do well
in higher education: for them, scholarships which make their first year entirely free give
them a risk-free opportunity to test their abilities and to become well-informed about higher
education. Once such a student does well in the first year, he or she will be much more
prepared to take out at least a partial loan for the rest of the degree.
78.
E XTRA PERSONAL AND INTELLECTUAL SUPPORT IN HIGHER EDUCATION . A second
ingredient in promoting access is extra personal and intellectual support, at least in the early
days, for access students to make sure that, once a student starts at university, he or she gets
the necessary support to make the transition. It is no good persuading someone to go to
university if he or she is then allowed to sink without trace.
79.
R AISING ASPIRATIONS OF SCHOOL CHILDREN . Action is also needed much earlier.
Information and raising aspirations are critical. The saddest impediment to access is someone
who has never even thought of applying to university. The sorts of schemes involved include
Saturday Schools, which bring schoolchildren from poor areas to university to study on
Saturday mornings; summer schools, which do something similar during the summer
vacation; visit days, when schoolchildren can visit a university; visits by academics to
schools to make the idea of higher education more tangible; visits by current students, ideally
from the same or a similar school, to schools in deprived areas; and mentoring of
schoolchildren by current university students, preferably from a similar background. Such
activities needs to start early, e.g. at age 12.
Nicholas Barr April 2002
1980.
M ORE RESOURCES EARLIER IN THE SYSTEM . Problems of access to higher education
cannot be solved entirely within the higher education sector. Thus more resources are needed
earlier in the education system, which is where the real barriers to access occur. 23 This
includes more resources for teaching. It also includes financial support for 16-18 year olds.
5 Conclusion
81.
At risk of sounding repetitive, the root of all the funding problems of the present
system go back – directly or indirectly – to the interest subsidy on student loans.
• Interest subsidies aggravate the shortage of resources in the sector, compete with
university funding, cause loans to be inadequate, crowd out expenditure to promote
access, and are deeply regressive.
• Setting the interest rate that graduates pay equal to the government's cost of
borrowing is the key to addressing all these problems and, on a conservative estimate,
yields some £700 million per year. That sum is important for its own sake; it is even
more important because a fiscally cost-effective loan scheme can leverage a much
greater volume of private finance. Specifically, with no increase in long-run fiscal
costs, it would be possible nearly to triple total lending, or to combine a smaller
expansion of loans with additional grant expenditure.
• Grasping the nettle makes possible the policies for access and quality set out in
section 4.
• The move is less difficult than it sounds – perhaps the political equivalent of the
'worried well'. In Sweden and the Netherlands graduates pay an interest rate broadly
equal to the government's cost of borrowing, and the matter is not regarded as in any
way noteworthy; and Australia and New Zealand are currently facing the same reality
as the UK.
• In contrast, if the interest subsidy is not eliminated, we might as well all pack our bags
and go home.
23
Educational exclusion has a clear connection with broader social exclusion – for example, less than 25% of
children in care in the UK end up with any formal educational qualification.
Nicholas Barr April 2002
20Annex 1: The student support system before and after 1998
82.
Table 1 summarises in simplified from (and with rounded numbers) the system of
student support for students who started their degree between 1990 and 1997, and that for
students who started their degree in 1998 or later.
83.
The old system was introduced gradually. When fully phased in, it operated through:
(a)
(b)
(c)
84.
50 per cent of student living costs from a mortgage-type loan;
50 per cent of living costs from a mixture of grant and parental contribution;
no tuition fees paid by the student.
The arrangements since the 1998 have three components:
(a)
(b)
(c)
an income-contingent loan;
replacement of the grant by a loan entitlement which is partially income tested; 24
an income-tested tuition fee.
Table 1: Student support: the system until 1998 and the current system
Living expenses
The system until 1998
Tuition
50% mortgage-type loan;
50% grant/parental contribution
Free
'Poor' student 100% income-contingent loan
Free
'Rich' student Parental contribution of 25% of £1000 flat-fee from
living costs; income-contingent parental contributions
loan the rest
The current system
85.
To amplify the current system:
• 'Poor' students (i.e. where parent/spouse net income is below about £18,000 per year)
pay no tuition fee and are eligible for an income-contingent loan intended to cover
100% of living costs.
• 'Rich' students (whose parents' or spouse's net income is above about £34,000 per
year) pay the full £1000 fee. They are entitled to an income-contingent loan equal to
75% of the maximum loan. It is assumed that the parental contribution pays the
tuition fee and 25% of living costs.
• In between, loan entitlement and fees are calculated on a sliding scale. 25
86.
To illustrate these arrangements with a simplified numerical example, suppose that it
is estimated that students need £4000 to cover living costs, made up, under the old system
24
Poor students are eligible for 'a maintenance loan of the same value as the current grant and loan package'
(Hansard, (Commons), 23 July 1997, col. 950).
25
Herein lies much of the complexity – for details, see Department for Education and Skills (2001)
(http://www.dfes.gov.uk/studentsupport/ ss_admin/content/dsp_section_29.shtml, Chapter 6)
Nicholas Barr April 2002
21(line 1 of Table 1) of a loan entitlement of £2000 and grant/parental contribution of £2000.
Thus the maximum parental contribution (for a student not eligible for any grant) is £2000.
87.
Under current arrangements, a poor student is eligible for an income-contingent loan
of £4000 to cover living expenses, and does not have to pay a tuition fee. A rich student
receives £2000 in parental contribution, £1000 to cover the tuition fee and £1000 towards
living costs, and is eligible for an income-contingent loan of £3000 to cover remaining living
costs.
Nicholas Barr April 2002
22Annex 2: An unsubsidised interest rate: how much extra for graduates?
88.
What is the effect on repayments if graduates pay an interest rate equal to the
government's cost of borrowing rather than (as currently) the rate of inflation?
89.
A NSWER 1: MONTHLY REPAYMENTS . The change has no effect on a graduate's monthly
repayments. Since loans are income-contingent, repayments depend only a person's monthly
income. Thus the higher interest rate affects the duration of repayments but not the amount
of the monthly repayment.
90.
A NSWER 2: TOTAL REPAYMENTS . On average, it is estimated that students will take
15-20 years to repay their loans (since the system of income-contingent repayments is new,
estimates are all that we have). The model referred to in para. 37, estimates that at today's
prices if a graduate takes 15 years to repay his loan, the extra interest payments on a loan of
£12,000 from removing the interest subsidy is about £3700. The comparable figure if he
takes 20 years to repay is £4700. Thus a plausible estimate of the additional interest
repayments of an average student taking 171⁄2 years to repay is £4250.
91.
S OME COMPARATORS . These numbers need to be seen in context.
• With even a modest graduate premium (15%) and real wage growth (including career
progression) of 5%, a graduate will earn £270,000 more than a non-graduate over a
35-year career. The extra interest payments are a minuscule price for those benefits.
• Over 35 years, a non-graduate on average earnings pays about £520,000 in income tax
and national insurance contributions; with a graduate premium of 15%, the equivalent
figure for a graduate is about £600,000. Thus the additional interest payment is
equivalent to a tax increase of about 0.7%.
• Over the lifetime of the average loan, a graduate will spend on average £25,000 on
alcohol. To spend £25,000 out of after-tax income a person paying basic rate income
tax etc., has to earn £37,000. Thus it would be possible to finance the additional
interest payments by having one booze-free day per week till the loan has been paid
off.
92.
The figures in the previous two paragraphs are in cash terms. The equivalent figures
in present value terms, at a 5% discount rate, are as follows. On a loan of £12,000, the present
value of the extra interest payments is £2,880 over 15 years, or £3,350 over 20 years; thus the
average student will pay around £3,115 in additional interest payments. Over a 35-year
career, the extra earnings of a graduate are £105,000. The present value of the income tax
and NICs paid over 35 years by a non-graduate on average earnings is £195,000; for a
graduate the comparable figure is £228,000. The present value of expenditure on alcohol
over 171⁄2 years by an average graduate is £14,000, requiring pre-tax earnings of nearly
£21,000.
Nicholas Barr April 2002
23Annex 3: An open-ended graduate tax: problems but no solutions
93.
An open-ended graduate tax (i.e. one which is paid for, say, 25 years irrespective of a
person's earnings) creates major problems.
94.
C ONTINUED RELIANCE ON PUBLIC FUNDING . Since a graduate tax is irredeemably a
tax, it cannot be privatised. It merely continues public funding through a different route.
Thus the flow of private finance via graduates’ repayments is slow in coming, and hence does
nothing to improve access or quality in the short term.
95.
Even in the medium term, a graduate tax does not necessarily produce extra resources
for higher education, since increasing flows of private finance in (say) 10 years time can be
offset by reduced public funding. This is exactly what has happened in Australia, whose
Higher Education Contribution Scheme (HECS) was introduced in 1989 with the express aim
of increasing resources for higher education. That aim remains unfulfilled.
'A year-long investigation into Australian higher education by a senate committee has
found the nation's university system in crisis and in need of substantial public
investment over the next ten years.
'The committee found that universities were seriously underfunded and were
worryingly reliant on non-government sources of revenue, notably on fee income
from foreign and local students' (Times Higher Education Supplement, 19 October
2001, p. 10).
96.
In sharpest contrast, a well-designed loan scheme could bring in private funds from
day 1, in ways which avoid these problems.
97.
C LOSES OPTIONS WHICH A LOAN SCHEME LEAVES OPEN . As discussed in section 4,
above, a scheme which avoids interest subsidies makes possible a wide variety of highly
desirable options, such as making higher education free at the point of use – options which
the fiscal cost of a graduate tax entirely rules out.
98.
U NFAIR .
reasons:
A graduate tax is unfair (and hence politically unpopular) for several
• People are compelled to make continuing contributions, with no option to pay upfront
if they wish.
• Those contributions are unrelated to the cost of their higher education.
• The contributions will be considerable for a successful professional, and can be
enormous, e.g. for the Mick Jaggers or Stelios Haji-Ioannous of this world.
99.
H YPOTHECATION . What happens to the revenue from a graduate tax?
• If it is simply another source of income for the Consolidated Fund, it is a tax, pure and
simple, and higher education continues to be publicly funded.
• If it is explicitly dedicated to higher education, it is a hypothecated tax – a mechanism
which (with the exception of the national insurance fund) the Treasury has always
regarded as an anathema. Any such move would be a major policy shift. Such a shift
might be worth discussing if the potential gains are great, but that is not the case here.
Nicholas Barr April 2002
24100. B OUNDARY PROBLEMS . A graduate tax is (a) compulsory (contrast loans, where
students can choose whether or not to borrow), and (b) binary (contrast loans, where students
can choose how much to borrow), and thus creates major boundary problems as between:
• Different occupations. Do all UK students pay the graduate tax? Doctors? Nurses?
Intending teachers? Once a group is granted an exemption, there will be pressure to
extend it, and considerable difficulty in removing an exemption from any group.
• Different modes of study. Does the graduate tax apply equally to full-time and part-
time students? What about Open University students?
• Different parts of the UK. A major problem arises because taxation operates on a UK
basis but the responsibility for higher education is devolved. A graduate tax thus
opens up a Pandora’s box – for example, the Scottish Executive could ask for a
different form of graduate tax, or could opt out altogether. If the graduate tax is not
the same throughout the UK, would an English person who studied in Scotland pay
the English rate or the Scottish rate? Would the answer be the same for a Scot who
studied in England? Ditto Northern Ireland (over half of whose students attend
universities in the Republic of Ireland or the mainland)?
• Different parts of the EU. Does the graduate tax apply to UK graduates who studied
in other EU countries (or elsewhere); and how are EU students at UK universities
treated?
101. All these boundary problems raise major practical problems for the tax authorities as
well as creating a potential political minefield.
Nicholas Barr April 2002
25Annex 4: Legal issues
I NCOME - CONTINGENT LOANS AND THE C ONSUMER C REDIT A CT
102. Though income-contingent student loans are not made under the Consumer Credit Act
(CCA), it is desirable that they stay as close as possible to the Act and to other relevant
financial legislation.
103. The problem is as follows. Under the CCA, loan agreements have to specify interest
charges across the life of the contract. That is possible only if the repayment flow is known.
This is not a problem for a conventional (mortgage-type) loan, but is not possible with
income-contingent loans, where repayments depend on a person's (unknown) future income
stream and hence have an unknown duration. The issue was sidestepped in 1997/8 by
arguing that the current student loan, which is indexed to the retail price index, is below the
low interest threshold for the CCA. 26 Since that threshold is low, an unsubsidised loan would
almost certainly exceed it, if not now, then at some time in the future.
104.
There are two potential avenues to resolving the problem;
(a) revise the CCA to accommodate income-contingent loans; or
(b) ensure that the legislation bringing in new student support arrangements explicitly
excludes those arrangements from the CCA via Statutory Instrument.
Approach (b) presents no obvious problems: a loan which charges the government's cost of
borrowing is within the spirit of the CCA; the process in (b) is simpler and quicker than (a);
and it leaves it open subsequently to amend the CCA if the government so wished.
L OANS FOR FEES AND COMPLIANCE WITH EU LEGISLATION
105. At present, UK students are eligible for a loan which covers (part of) their
maintenance, but not their tuition fees. If loans covered fees, it would be illegal to deny loans
to students from other EU countries studying in the UK. 27 A court case is currently testing
whether it is legal to deny such students access to maintenance loans. In considering the
coverage of loans, the following points are relevant.
106. Loans to cover fees are highly desirable because they make higher education free at
the point of use. Thus the issue of EU-compliance should be addressed in the medium term;
and it might have to be addressed in the short term even for maintenance loans, depending on
the outcome of court case mentioned above. The problem should not be exaggerated. The
loan contract that students currently sign entitles them to income-contingent repayments
while within the UK tax net, but requires them to make mortgage (or similar) repayments if
26
The England, Wales and Northern Ireland Teaching and Higher Education Act 1998 (THEA 1998), s.22(4)
and s.22(9) provide that Secretary of State may only charge compound interest rates required to maintain the
value in real terms of the outstanding amounts of the loan, which shall at no time exceed the 'specified rate for
low interest loans'. This 'specified rate for low interest' is defined in s.22(9) as the rate specified for exemption
purposes under s.16(5)(b) of the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (CCA 1974). The Scotland Teaching and Higher
Education Act 1998, s29 inserts amendments to the Education (Scotland) Act 1980, (ESA 1980). The ESA 1980
s.73B(6) includes the same provision as s.22(9) of the THEA 1998, and therefore defines the low interest rate as
a rate that will ensure exemption under the CCA 1974.
27
The post-Cubie arrangements in Scotland, by ensuring that students face no upfront charges, in effect extends
loans to cover fees, thus raising serious problems of compliance with EU law.
Nicholas Barr April 2002
26they work abroad. This process is already embedded in the procedures of the Student Loans
Company and works well. In the short run it could be extended to EU students.
107. A better starting point is to note that foreign students are a good thing, not a bad thing.
Higher education is – and should continue to be – a major UK export industry whose benefits
are both direct (income from overseas students) and indirect (future UK exports). A properly
designed loan scheme is self-funding apart from non-repayments from the lifetime poor,
which introduce a social policy element into the scheme. Extending the scheme to EU
students is thus feasible on the basis that each government agrees to cover the social policy
element of loans for its own citizens.
Nicholas Barr April 2002
27References
Barr, Nicholas (1997), 'Student Loans in New Zealand', in Third Report: The Dearing Report: Some
Funding Issues, Volume II, Minutes of Evidence and Appendices, House of Commons Education and
Employment Committee, Session 1997-98, HC241-II, (TSO, 1997), pp. 119-21.
Barr, Nicholas (2001), The Welfare State as Piggy Bank: Information, Risk, Uncertainty, and the Role
of the State, Oxford University Press.
Barr, Nicholas and Crawford, Iain (1997), ‘The Dearing Report, the Government's Response and a
View Ahead', in Third Report: The Dearing Report: Some Funding Issues, Volume II, Minutes of
Evidence and Appendices, House of Commons Education and Employment Committee, Session 1997–
98, HC241-II (TSO), 88–103.
Barr, Nicholas and Falkingham, Jane (1993), Paying for Learning, Welfare State Programme,
Discussion Paper WSP/94, London: London School of Economics.
Barr, Nicholas and Falkingham, Jane (1996), Repayment Rates for Student Loans: Some Sensitivity
Tests, Welfare State Programme, Discussion Paper WSP/127, London: London School of Economics.
Barr, Nicholas, and Low, William (1988), Student Grants and Student Poverty, Welfare State
Programme, Discussion Paper WSP/28, London: London School of Economics.
Callender, Claire, and Kemp, Martin (2000), 'Changing Student Finances: Income, Expenditure and
Take-up of Student Loans among Full- and Part-time Higher Education Students in 1998/9', London:
Department of Education and Employment Research Report RR213.
Chapman, Bruce (1997), ‘Conceptual Issues and the Australian Experience with Income Contingent
Charges for Higher Education', Economic Journal, 107/442 (May), 738–51.
Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals (1996), Our Universities, Our Future, Special Report
4: The Case for a New Higher Education Funding System, London: Committee of Vice-Chancellors
and Principals.
Council for Industry and Higher Education (2001), The Funding of UK Higher Education: The CIHE
Submission to the Comprehensive Spending Review, London: Council for Industry and Higher
Education.
Department for Education and Skills (2001), Higher Education Student Support in England and
Wales 2001/02: Chapter 6: Assessing Financial Entitlement (http://www.dfes.gov.uk/studentsupport/
ss_admin/content/dsp_section_29.shtml, Chapter 6)
National Audit Office (2002), Widening Participation in Higher Education in England, Report by the
Comptroller and Auditor General, HC 485, Session 2001-2002, London: TSO.
National Committee of Inquiry into Higher Education (the Dearing Committee) (1997), Higher
Education in the Learning Society: Main Report, London: HMSO.
New Zealand Tertiary Education Advisory Committee (2001), Shaping the Funding Framework:
Fourth Report of the Tertiary Education Advisory Committee: Summary Report, Tertiary Education
Advisory Committee, Wellington, New Zealand, November (http://www.teac.govt.nz/
fframework.htm).
Piatt, Wendy, and Robinson, Peter (2001), Opportunity for whom? Options for funding and structure
of post-16 education, London: Institute for Public Policy Research.
Nicholas Barr April 2002
28
