Common Course Rules - Bachelor Degree
INTRODUCTION
In Higher Education (HE), all courses offered by the University must comply with national regulatory
requirements, for example the Australian Qualifications Framework (AQF), and many courses are also
accredited through professional organisations. The University as a self-accrediting institution has a Council
that determines course rules which provide course structures and rules for HE awards. These course rules
apply to HE AQF Levels 5 to 10.
For each category of award there is a common set of rules applicable to all programs leading to an award
in that category. In addition, each course may have associated with it specific rules that apply only to that
course in addition to the common rules; specific rules are described in the course curriculum
documentation.
STATEMENT OF AUTHORITY
The authority behind this policy is the Charles Darwin University Act 2003 section 47 under the authority
of the Council.
COMPLIANCE
This is a compliance requirement under the Australian Qualifications Framework.
RELEVANT DEFINITIONS
In the context of this document
Award means a recognised certification of achievement or competence which may be granted to a student
after successful completion of all the requirements of a course;
Combined course means an approved program of study leading to two qualifications for which all
requirements have been met. Such a program of study may require a longer period of study than for the
individual courses of which it is comprised, but the total study period may be less than that required to
meet the requirements of the qualifications individually;
Common Units means a group of units intended, to provide an introduction to higher education study, and
to assist students to develop a degree of academic literacy and the capacity to critically explore social and
cultural issues of local, national and international relevance. Common units are offered at the 100 level
only;
Core unit means a unit that is compulsory for the course;
Course means a formally approved/accredited program of learning that leads to the award of a
qualification;
Credit point means a value allocated to individual higher education units to indicate their contribution to
the overall course requirements and to the enrolment load of a student e.g. a 10 credit point unit
represents a quarter of a standard load for a semester;
Common Course Rules - Bachelor Degree - rul-003
Version: 2.02
Governance Document once printed is considered an uncontrolled document. Only documents in the
University Governance Document Library online are considered to be the most current version.
Page 1 of 6Elective means a unit selected by the student from any of the University’s higher education units. Where
appropriate, an elective may include certain specified VET units or combinations of modules;
Exceptional circumstances means extended and serious illness of the student or an immediate family
member; extreme financial hardship; long-term cultural obligations; or other circumstances such that
failure to recognise them would result in an unfair or unreasonable outcome;
Faculty means the Faculty in which the student is enrolled for their course;
Integrated qualification means a purposely designed qualification that enables explicit articulation
pathways and encompasses more than one AQF level and/or qualification type and/or education and
training sector;
Joint course means an approved program of study leading to a qualification delivered by two or more
institutions under a formally approved arrangement and resulting in a single testamur awarded by the
partner institutions. A joint course should not be confused with a combined qualification (such as Bachelor
of Arts/Bachelor of Laws);
Major area of study means an approved series of units which develop a coherent academic theme
culminating in advanced level units within a course leading to the qualification of Bachelor degree. A major
area of study constitutes a substantive quantum of learning within the qualification;
Nested qualifications (refer to integrated qualifications);
Program of learning is a course, curriculum, training package, unit of study or structured workplace learning
that leads to the award of a qualification;
PVC means the Pro-Vice Chancellor (or delegate of the Pro-Vice Chancellor) of the Faculty in which the
student is enrolled;
Qualification means the result of a completed accredited program of learning that leads to formal
certification that a graduate has achieved learning outcomes as described in the AQF;
Research comprises systematic experimental and theoretical work, application and/or development that
results in an increase in the dimensions of knowledge;
Sequence is an approved progression of units which develop a coherent academic theme within a course.
A sequence normally comprises a minimum of one quarter of the credit points within the qualification;
Special Circumstance means a situation which is an exception to the general rule, is beyond the student’s
control, is not reasonably foreseeable and which prevents the student from engaging in a University activity
such as: accepting an international offer of a place, withdrawing from a unit prior to census/cut-off date,
completing the requirements for an unit of study or attending a scheduled examination. Examples may
include sudden illness or disability; loss of employment; an inability to obtain a student visa; death of the
student or a close family member (parent, sibling, spouse or child); natural catastrophe; or a political or
civil uprising;
Specialist elective means a unit selected by the student from a group of units identified as highly relevant
to the course;
Standard load means a real or notional program of learning which a full-time student would be required to
undertake in a full year of a particular course. The University has adopted 80 credit points as its standard
load; and
Common Course Rules - Bachelor Degree - rul-003
Version: 2.02
Governance Document once printed is considered an uncontrolled document. Only documents in the
University Governance Document Library online are considered to be the most current version.
Page 2 of 6Unit is the smallest credit-bearing component of a qualification that has been accredited. A unit may also
be called a ‘module’, ‘subject’, ‘unit of competency’ or ‘accredited unit’.
RULES
Courses Leading to the Qualification of Bachelor Degree
The following rules apply to courses leading to the qualification of Bachelor Degree including combined
and/or joint Bachelor Degrees.
These Rules may be cited as the "Bachelor Degree Rules".
Admission
An applicant for admission to a course leading to the qualification of Bachelor Degree must have:






Successfully completed the Northern Territory Certificate of Education (Year 12) or equivalent; or
Successfully completed a VET award of Certificate Level 4 or higher; or
Successfully completed at least half a year of full-time study or equivalent of an undergraduate
degree/diploma course at an Australian registered University or University College or overseas
equivalent; or
Successfully completed a University Tertiary Enabling Program or other recognised bridging or
tertiary preparation course; or
Attained a STAT (Special Tertiary Admissions Test) score of 145 or greater for applicants who sat
the STAT pre April 2010 and 135 or greater for applicants who sat the STAT post April 2010; or
Been approved for special admission on the basis of an acceptable personal competencies
statement and/or employment experience.
Note: A student may not hold concurrent places in more than one CDU course leading to a qualification at
any one AQF level.
Course Requirements
Courses leading to the qualification of Bachelor Degree must meet the requirements for AQF Level 7
Bachelor Degrees.
Unless otherwise specified in the course curriculum documentation, a course leading to the qualification
of Bachelor Degree shall include:




Common units;
Core units;
Specialist elective units; and/or
Elective units;
to a total value of 240 credit points for a three (3) year course, and 320 credit points for a four (4) year
course leading to the qualification of Bachelor Degree. Some courses may not include all unit classifications
i.e. common, specialist elective and/or elective.
Unless otherwise specified in the course curriculum documentation, the total credit point value for the
core and specialist elective units of a course shall be a minimum of half of the total credit point value of the
course.
Common Course Rules - Bachelor Degree - rul-003
Version: 2.02
Governance Document once printed is considered an uncontrolled document. Only documents in the
University Governance Document Library online are considered to be the most current version.
Page 3 of 6Courses leading to the qualification of Bachelor Degree may include major areas of study as designated in
the course curriculum documentation including:


No more than 20 credit points at level 100; and
A minimum of 30 credit points at level 300 or above;
to a total of at least 60 credit points
Unless otherwise specified in the course curriculum documentation, no more than 10 credit points may be
counted towards more than one major area of study.
Courses leading to the qualification of Bachelor Degree may include sequences as designated in the course
curriculum documentation.
Prerequisites and Co-requisites
All prerequisites and co-requisites for core units shall be core units; and all prerequisites and co-requisites
for specialist elective units may be either core units or specialist elective units.
A student may not enrol in any unit until all prerequisite units (or their equivalents as approved by the PVC)
have been completed satisfactorily. The PVC may waive prerequisite requirements in special
circumstances.
Periods of Enrolment
The maximum period of enrolment for a course leading to a qualification of Bachelor Degree shall be twice
the period required for a student undertaking a standard load to complete the course, plus two (2) years.
In exceptional circumstances, the PVC may extend the period of enrolment.
Alternative Exit Awards
In some cases, a student enrolled in a course leading to a qualification of Bachelor Degree may elect not to
complete the course leading to a Bachelor Degree but instead seek to exit with an alternative award. Such
cases are governed by the Integrated Qualifications Policy.
Award of the Qualification
To receive a University award, a student must complete a minimum of one third of the award or a minimum
of one (1) year full-time equivalent, whichever is the lesser, through enrolment in the University course
leading to the awarding of that qualification unless the course leads to an approved integrated qualification.
Unless otherwise specified in the course curriculum documentation, to be eligible to receive the
qualification of Bachelor Degree a student must complete units to a specified value which shall normally
be at least 240 credit points for a three (3) year course, and 320 credit points for a four (4) year course
leading to a qualification of Bachelor Degree and, unless otherwise specified, must include:




Common units totalling at least 20 credit points;
All specified core units;
Specialist elective units with points value at least that specified in the course curriculum
documentation;
Elective units as specified in the course curriculum documentation;
Common Course Rules - Bachelor Degree - rul-003
Version: 2.02
Governance Document once printed is considered an uncontrolled document. Only documents in the
University Governance Document Library online are considered to be the most current version.
Page 4 of 6


For a course with a total credit points value of 240, no more than 100 credit points at the 100 level
and, for longer courses, no more than 20 additional credit points at the 100 level for each additional
80 credit points;
A minimum of one quarter of the total credit points at level 300 or above; and
Meet any other requirements as may be specified in the course curriculum documentation.
All students must successfully complete University common units as per the Advanced Standing Policy.
Where a student completes the requirements of a course leading to the qualification of Bachelor Degree,
Council shall award that qualification.
Termination of the Course
When a course is approved for termination or is superseded:




Transition/completion arrangements for existing students must be clearly documented and
disseminated to all existing students;
As far as possible, students shall not be disadvantaged by the transition/completion;
The course will be offered for re-enrolment only until all existing students have
completed/transitioned or for a period not to exceed twice the period required for a student
undertaking a standard load to complete the course, whichever is less;
At the conclusion of the period for which the course is offered for re-enrolment only, the course
shall be closed.
ESSENTIAL SUPPORTING INFORMATION
Internal
Advanced Standing Policy
Grading Policy
Higher Education Course Accreditation and Reaccreditation Procedures (CARP)
Higher Education Course Delivery Relationships with Other Entities Policy
Higher Education Students - Academic Progression Procedures
External
Australian Qualifications Framework
Common Course Rules - Bachelor Degree - rul-003
Version: 2.02
Governance Document once printed is considered an uncontrolled document. Only documents in the
University Governance Document Library online are considered to be the most current version.
Page 5 of 6Document History and Version Control
Last amendment: 15 Dec 2017
Next Review :
Sponsor: Vice-Chancellor
Contact Officer: Pro Vice-Chancellor, Education and Student Success
Dec 2015
Version Date Approved Approved by Brief Description
1.00 26 6 2002 Council Creation of original document and upload to CDU website.
1.01 9 Dec 2005 Secretary to
Council Editorial Change - Vocational Education and Training to
VET
1.02 2 Mar 2006 Secretary to
Council Editorial Change – NTU to CDU
Remove invalid NTETA link
4.4.1 (a) Remove reference to common course names
2.00 7 Dec 2012 Council Major review of document to remove procedural details
and ensure compliance with AQF
2.01 6 Mar 2013 Governance 

 Assigned document number
Updated and added hyperlinks
Minor changes to formatting, wording and grammar
2.02 15 Dec 2017 Governance  Conversion to new Governance template due to new
University branding
Updated hyperlinks
Updated Contact officer to Pro Vice-Chancellor,
Education and Student Success
Added Sponsor, Vice-Chancellor



Essential supporting Information updates


Common Course Rules - Bachelor Degree - rul-003
Higher Education Students Progression Procedures
Changed to Higher Education Students - Academic
Progression Procedures
Academic Qualifications and Unit Level Policy (under
development), Advanced Standing Policy (under
development) and Integrated Qualifications Policy
(under development) removed
Version: 2.02
Governance Document once printed is considered an uncontrolled document. Only documents in the
University Governance Document Library online are considered to be the most current version.
Page 6 of 6
