See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/254195471 
Higher Education, Innovation and Economic Development 
Article 
CITATIONS 29 
READS 369 
1 author: 
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects: 
Bengt-Åke Lundvall 
145 PUBLICATIONS 19,904 CITATIONS 
SEE PROFILE 
The Learning Economy and the Economics of Hope View project 
MEADOW View project 
All content following this page was uploaded by Bengt-Åke Lundvall on 07 October 2014. 
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. 
45490 
2008 
A B C D E 
Annual World Bank Conference on 
Development Economics 
Regional 
Higher Education and 
Development 
Edited by Justin Yifu Lin and Boris Pleskovic 
Higher Education and 
Development 
Annual World Bank Conference 
on Development Economics—Regional 
2008 
Higher Education and Development 
Washington, D.C. 
Edited by Justin Yifu Lin and Boris Pleskovic 
© 2008 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank 1818 H Street, N.W. Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A. Internet: www.worldbank.org E-mail: feedback@worldbank.org 
All rights reserved 
1 2 3 4 5 10 09 08 
This volume is the product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this volume do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. 
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank of the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries. 
Rights and Permissions The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission promptly to reproduce portions of the work. 
For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, Tel: 978-750-8400, Fax: 978-750-4470, www.copyright.com. 
All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, Fax: 202-522-2422, email: pubrights@worldbank.org. 
ISBN: 978-0-8213-7123-7 eISBN: 978-0-8213-7124-4 DOI: 10.1596/978-0-8213-7123-7 ISSN: 1020-4407 
ABOUT THIS BOOK vii 
INTRODUCTION 1 Justin Yifu Lin and Boris Pleskovic 
OPENING ADDRESS 9 Wu Qidi 
OPENING ADDRESS 13 François Bourguignon 
KEYNOTE ADDRESS Skilled Labor and the International Economy: Whence It Comes, Whither It Goes 15 L. Alan Winters 
KEYNOTE ADDRESS Global Returns to Higher Education: Trends, Drivers, and Policy Responses 25 François Bourguignon and F. Halsey Rogers 
KEYNOTE ADDRESS Higher Education Financing in East Asia: Policy Implications for China 41 Weifang Min 
Higher Education and Migration: Brain Drain and Sharing Skills in the Region 
Higher Education and International Migration in Asia: Brain Circulation 59 Mark R. Rosenzweig 
COMMENTS Frédéric Docquier 85 Patricia Sto Tomas 93v 
Contents 
vi | CONTENTS 
Private-Public Provision of Higher Education 
Intersectoral Interfaces in Higher Education Development: Private and Public in Sync? 101 Daniel C. Levy 
COMMENTS Kai-ming Cheng 125 Norman LaRocque 133 
Financing Higher Education 
Financing Higher Education: Lessons from Developed Economies, Options for Developing Economies 143 Nicholas Barr 
Technological Innovation: Linkages between Universities and Industry 
Wellsprings of Modern Economic Growth: Higher Education, Innovation, and Local Economic Development 177 Maryann P. Feldman and Ian I. Stewart 
Higher Education, Innovation, and Economic Development 201 Bengt-Åke Lundvall 
COMMENTS Fumio Kodama 229 Shahid Yusuf 237 
Higher Education and Labor Markets in Asia 
Higher Education and the Labor Market in India 245 Pawan Agarwal 
COMMENTS Satryo Soemantri Brodjonegoro 273 Sharifah Hapsah Shahabudin 279 
The Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics is a forum for discussion and debate of important policy issues facing developing countries. The conferences emphasize the contribution that empirical economic research can make to understanding development processes and to formulating sound development policies. Conference papers are written by researchers and academics in and outside the World Bank. The conference series was started in 1989. Conference papers are reviewed by the editors and are also subject to internal and external peer review. Some papers were revised after the conference, to reflect comments made by discussants or from the floor, while most discussants’ comments were not revised. As a result, discussants’ comments may refer to elements of the paper that no longer exist in their original form. Participants’ affiliations identified in this volume are as of the time of the conference, January 16–17, 2007. 
Justin Yifu Lin and Boris Pleskovic edited this volume. As in previous years, the planning and organization of the 2007 conference was a joint effort. Special thanks are due to Alan Gelb for overall guidance. We thank several anonymous reviewers for their comments and Aehyung Kim for her useful suggestions and advice. We also thank the conference coordinator, Leita Jones, whose excellent organizational skills helped ensure a successful conference. Finally for pulling this volume together we thank the editorial staff, especially Stuart Tucker and Mark Ingebretsen from the Office of the Publisher. Book production and dissemination were coordinated by the World Bank Office of the Publisher. 
vii 
About This Book 
The Annual Bank Conference on Development Economics (ABCDE) is one of the best-known conferences for the presentation and discussion of new knowledge on de velopment. It is an opportunity for many of the world’s finest development thinkers to present their ideas. The papers in this volume were presented at the ABCDE that was held on January 16–17, 2007, in Beijing, China. Each year the topics selected for the conference represent either new areas of concern for future research or areas that we believe will benefit from a reexamination. 
The topic of the 2007 conference was “Higher Education and Development,” which encompassed five themes: higher education and migration, private-public provision of higher education, financing of higher education, technological innovation (linkages between universities and industry), and higher education and labor markets in Asia. 
Welcome Addresses 
In her welcome address, Wu Qidi notes that the exchange of ideas at this ABCDE conference are important for promoting the development of higher education in East Asia, especially in China. She then introduces seven aspects of recent progress in China’s higher education. First, China has established the world’s largest higher education system by rapidly increasing the enrollment rate during the last decade. Second, the quality of higher education has been improving steadily due to reforms that have modified teaching methods. Third, educational infrastructure, including libraries and teachers’ quality, has been consistently improved. Fourth, a breakthrough has been made in reform of the higher education system, including theJustin Yifu Lin is chief economist and senior vice president of the World Bank. Boris Pleskovic is research manager, Development Economics, World Bank. 
Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics 2008, Regional © 2008 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank 
1 
Introduction 
JUSTIN YIFU LIN AND BORIS PLESKOVIC 
2 | JUSTIN YIFU LIN AND BORIS PLESKOVIC 
reform of administrative mechanisms giving provincial governments a major role in managing their higher education institutions and in assisting low-income students with financial aid. Fifth, remarkable progress has been made by supporting projects to build world-class universities and research centers. Sixth, the research capacity in science and technology, as well as in humanities and social sciences, has been strengthened. Finally, the international status of higher education has been promoted by establishing educational cooperation and exchange with 178 countries, regions, and international organizations. Qidi concludes that, although the progress has been remarkable, China still confronts many challenges, including the need to devote more resources for higher education. 
François Bourguignon states that Regional Bank Conference on Development Economics (RBCDE) is an important event, which has evolved over the years into a major forum for international researchers to focus on development issues in particular regions of the world. He notes that the focus of this conference—higher education and development—is a topic of great importance for the East Asia region and for middle-income countries in general. Bourguignon observes that, at relatively low levels of national development, the focus of educational policy is mostly on primary education, an emphasis embedded in the Millennium Development Goals. He argues that, as development proceeds, economic growth creates demand for workers with higher education, thus shifting the emphasis from primary to both the secondary and tertiary levels, a process that has been reflected in recent educational developments in China. In this regard, he observes that historically the World Bank made its first loan to China a quarter century ago, and it was intended for higher education. Many other World Bank loans for higher education have followed. 
Bourguignon notes that, while primary education can be justified easily in terms of the benefits of and costs to society, the issues are much more complex for higher levels of education. Specifically, he lists several issues that require special consideration, such as who should pay for education, how it should be provided (public or private), and how the challenge of the brain drain of highly skilled professionals should be managed. 
Keynote Addresses 
In his keynote address, François Bourguignon discusses three questions. First, he asks whether developing countries are realizing higher returns to higher education, as observed the United States in the 1970s and 1980s. Second, he asks what is causing the trend in returns and whether this is a structural or a transitory phenomenon. Finally, he discusses policy issues that need to be addressed in responding to these trends. 
In the United States, the college premium has continued to rise since the late 1970s and 1980s, and several other high-income countries have shown a similar pattern. However, this is a broad trend that is not universal among Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries. On the basis of limited data, Bourguignon concludes that the evidence currently available suggests that, in 
INTRODUCTION | 3 
many countries, the relative return to higher education tended to increase in the 1980s and 1990s. Moreover, the trend appears to be even more consistent in the middle-income countries than in the OECD. He then discusses issues related to the demand for and supply of skills, noting that the literature has tended to show a global trend toward rising demand for skills. But for individual countries, trends in returns to skills depend on a complex, country-specific interaction of supply and demand. 
Bourguignon also discusses several issues for governments to consider regarding how best to address rising returns to tertiary education. He identifies three steps: (1) investing public resources for tertiary education efficiently; (2) expanding the pipeline of qualified entrants to tertiary education; and (3) assuring quality of both publicly and privately provided tertiary education. He argues that together this constitutes an agenda for ensuring that the tertiary sector can respond flexibly and efficiently to higher demand for skills. In conclusion, Bourguignon argues that, if the broad trend toward increasing earning differentials between highly educated people and other workers is allowed to continue, income and social inequalities will deepen. He states that it is important to take steps to avoid creating these fundamental inequalities in countries that enjoy rapid growth. He recommends that this can be achieved by the right combination of policies to expand access to tertiary education efficiently and on the basis of merit. 
Weifang Min presents the success story of several East Asian countries in achieving dynamic economic growth in the last 40 years. Min argues that many factors can explain the success. Among them are the priority given to industries with comparative advantages, export-oriented policies, policies supporting a free or managed market, relatively high saving and investment rates, and attitudes and work ethics supportive of development. Perhaps even more important, the values and cultural traditions of many East Asian economies attach a high priority to education, which has helped East Asia to produce relatively well-developed human resources and to absorb and apply new scientific and technological inventions relatively easily. These long-standing values and beliefs result in ever-increasing demands for education and have had a significant effect on development. According to the International Monetary Fund, “One lesson from the past is that the economies—such as Japan and South Korea—which committed themselves to education and training made great strides in both human development and economic development.” Thus it is a shared belief among East Asian economies that higher education is the key to advancing economic development. However, financing higher education poses a critical challenge. In addressing the financing issue, Min presents analyses of financing patterns for higher education in East Asia and discusses what a country like China may learn from the experience of other East Asian economies. 
Alan Winters presents a subject that lies close to the heart of the Global Development Network and the World Bank’s Development Economics Vice Presidency: the training and employment of highly skilled labor. Winters argues that the largest single contrast between developed and developing countries lies in the availability and use of highly skilled labor, although it is not the only cause of the differences in their economic, social, and political achievements. However, it seems safe to assert that it is a 
4 | JUSTIN YIFU LIN AND BORIS PLESKOVIC 
major contributor and that successful development will require markets for highly skilled labor that operate with a reasonable degree of social efficiency. He specifies social efficiency because there are good reasons to believe that skilled labor creates strong positive externalities, economically (for example, creating opportunities for others to be more productive), socially (delivering services where value exceeds cost or price), and even politically (strengthening institutions by enhancing accountability). 
Winters makes four propositions: universities are central to the training of highly skilled labor; the so-called brain circulation is an important topic for research because, whether positive or negative, its effects seem likely to be significant; building capacity to undertake policy research in developing countries is both difficult and important for enhancing development; and because labor is scarce, we should not waste it. The author concludes that highly skilled labor is one of the magic ingredients of development, yet there is much we do not know. The research agenda about how to produce highly skilled labor and allocate it across sectors is challenging. 
Higher Education and Migration: Brain Drain and Sharing Skills in the Region 
Mark R. Rosenzweig considers a neglected component of the international mobility of skilled individuals: domestic schooling policies and the supply of schooling to the foreign-born in high-income countries. He shows that much of the mobility of international students can be explained by the same factors that cause international migration: the search of workers for better-paying jobs. 
Based on new estimates of the global prices of skills, Rosenzweig finds that students out-migrate at greater rates from low-income countries and to host countries with the highest skill prices. However, student outflows also respond directly to domestic investments in higher education. The results indicate that upgrading the quality of higher education reduces student outflows to other countries, but that increasing the number of colleges increases the outflow of students for foreign (postgraduate) training. This phenomenon results from the fact that increasing the number of college graduates increases the population of workers who benefit more from migrating to high skill-price countries. 
The most important feature of student mobility is that a large fraction of students schooled abroad return to their home country. This is especially true for students from Asian countries. Rosenzweig finds that return rates of foreign-trained students are lower for low-wage countries. However, such countries have larger domestic populations of foreign-trained graduates, because they export larger numbers of students than high-wage sending countries. Rosenzweig points out that the subsidization of foreign students is disproportionate in high-income countries compared with low-wage countries. 
Even though low-income countries appear to be net beneficiaries, he identifies two issues of concern. First, because most foreign students are likely to come from higherincome elites, it is not clear that the best and the brightest from the sending countries 
INTRODUCTION | 5 
are being educated abroad. Second, because of incomplete data, it is not clear how many students return, and therefore, we lack sufficient evidence to characterize accurately the net brain drain from low-income countries. In conclusion, Rosenzweig states that higher education policies in countries with low skill prices cannot be appropriately formulated without paying attention to the causes of and returns to the out-migration of students seeking higher education and higher-paying jobs. 
Private-Public Provision of Higher Education 
Daniel C. Levy highlights the contribution of public and private higher education to national development. Higher education rarely remains a single-sector phenomenon, yet most analyses ignore or deal only perfunctorily with private sector provision. Levy departs from that pattern by identifying the principal characteristics of the fastgrowing private sector. We need to know how the two sectors contrast and interact. Levy points out that, for the most part, private and public sectors of higher education are significantly distinct from each other, playing largely contrasting roles for higher education and national development. Rapid for-profit growth is a current and dramatic example of such private-public distinctiveness. Patterns of interaction are quite varied, from conflict and competition to complementarity, emulation, and cooperation, both across and within regions as well as over time. Levy notes that strong empirical reality shows that there is more weight in private-public differences than in private-public similarities. The differences are fundamental in several key aspects of finance, governance, and functions. Levy concludes that the growth of private higher education has shaken up higher education, with the interrelationships between the private and public as well as between each and national development in a state of rapid flux. 
Financing Higher Education 
Nicholas Barr argues that education faces a collision between fiscal constraints and a need for more resources for investment in all levels of education. Technological change requires more varied and more frequent education and training, and demographic change points to a need for more investment in physical and human capital. However, international competition exerts downward pressure on fiscal capacity, and fiscal pressures are compounded by competing demands connected with aging populations and medical advances. In the face of these pressures, policy makers face a tradeoff between the size of the higher education system, its quality, its capacity to widen access, and its fiscal cost. Student loans can ease the tradeoff by supplementing public funding with private finance. But loans have institutional capacity requirements that frequently receive insufficient weight. 
Barr explores policy design, drawing on economic theory and international experience, and also discusses the institutional prerequisites for a loan system to be 
6 | JUSTIN YIFU LIN AND BORIS PLESKOVIC 
implemented effectively. In addition to considering how to locate resources, he discusses how to use resources most effectively; that is, mechanisms through which to allocate them to educational institutions (for example, competitive regime) and to students (loans or grants, needs-based or merit-based transfers). Finally, he explores the instruments that policy makers can use to expand educational opportunities, arguing that the issue is much wider than education finance. Financial measures include savings schemes, government subsidies (for example, “free” tuition), and cost sharing through current charges and student loans. Information measures seek to inform schoolchildren and raise their aspirations. Educational measures include improved early education. Thus an important message is that policy makers should consider higher education policies not in isolation, but from a life-cycle perspective that includes early education—a message very much in accord with those of the 2007 World Development Report. 
Technological Innovation: Linkages between Universities and Industry 
Maryann P. Feldman and Ian I. Stewart examine the relationships among institutions of higher education, innovation, and local economic development. Knowledge is arguably the most important commodity of the modern economy, and universities and other higher education institutions are the primary creators of this currency. One of the new responsibilities of institutions of higher education is to create effective knowledge transfer mechanisms, whether the purpose is to promote social or economic development, to enhance economic competitiveness, or simply to increase the stock of knowledge. The fact that much of the benefit of higher education is captured in a local area is part of the story related to the emergence and genesis of technologybased clusters. Many developing and developed economies attempt to emulate the U.S. experience and to replicate the success of Silicon Valley. The emphasis is typically on leveraging university resources to increase economic growth. The literature concludes, however, that universities are necessary, but not sufficient, for technologybased economic development to occur and that universities typically lag rather than lead economic development by becoming responsive once an entrepreneurial spark has been ignited. 
Feldman and Stewart then address the role of institutions of higher education in innovation systems and consider how best to create and enable human capital with the ultimate goal of reaping rewards in terms of wealth creation and higher standards of living. While considerable attention has been paid to the role of research universities, it is more appropriate to consider the entire sector of higher education, which includes the complementary and reinforcing institutions such as liberal arts colleges, institutes of technology, professional schools, community colleges, and continuing education programs. Taken together, these academic institutions provide the basis for the range of skills required for advanced economies and form the fabric of competitive regions. Feldman and Stewart emphasize the different roles and types of higher 
INTRODUCTION | 7 
education institutions as well as the contribution of each to the innovation system. They conclude by providing a framework for considering the evolving role of institutions of higher education. In addition, they argue that the policy implications of how best to organize higher education in order to create knowledge transfer to sustain innovation and economic growth is an important question for both advanced and developing economies. 
Bengt-Åke Lundvall links higher education to economic development and draws policy implications through an analysis of how graduates contribute to innovation and learning. Lundvall refers to recent empirical research and demonstrates that graduates act both as innovators and as equilibrators in the learning economy. The policy discussion focuses on two questions. First, how can higher education be designed so as to break the vicious circle of stagnating supply of and demand for graduates? Second, how can a general strategy be designed to vitalize national innovation systems that include investment in higher education as an important element? He encourages less developed countries to build universities more strongly rooted in the regional context, a model based on the U.S. land grant colleges, including extension services. 
Lundvall also recommends a deep reform of teaching methods by emphasizing problem-based learning, where problems are taken from the domestic reality, as well as integration of local practical experience in study programs. Without reform and with the focus on building universities as national centers of excellence, the major outcome of investments may be further brain drain toward the rich countries. He concludes by arguing that reforms of higher education cannot break vicious cycles on their own. Ambitious national strategies are needed to vitalize the innovation system. Reforming higher education should be seen as a key element of such a strategy. 
Higher Education and the Labor Markets in Asia 
Pawan Agarwal argues that skill-biased technical changes have created demand for a more qualified workforce. This has put pressure on higher education institutions to expand. Over the last few years, India has witnessed a healthy, but nontraditional, model of growth, with growth in services preceding growth in manufacturing. This growth has been driven primarily by the growth of information technology (IT) and IT-enabled services and skill-intensive manufacturing. The large pool of qualified manpower has helped to fuel this growth, initiating a perpetual cycle requiring even larger numbers of qualified people to sustain it. 
With the bulk of the publicly funded higher education system not equipping students with skills required in the labor market, the burden of providing people with requisite skills is on the private institutions. Private institutions emerged amid government ambivalence and produce graduates of uneven quality. The private institutions operate in a dysfunctional regulatory environment that neither maintains quality nor allows them to experiment and innovate. 
8 | JUSTIN YIFU LIN AND BORIS PLESKOVIC 
Agarwal undertakes a sector-by-sector analysis of the education and skills of the existing and projected workforce and matches them with existing and projected demand, concluding that the absolute number of qualified people is adequate, but the mismatch and poor quality of skills are serious concerns. Reorienting the public system of higher education, reforming the regulatory environment for the private sector, and building pathways between the formal and informal systems seem to be the way to make the connection between higher education and job creation. Taking the lessons from experience of other countries and adapting them to the Indian situation, Agarwal suggests various specific institutional mechanisms for better and continued alignment of the higher education and training systems with the labor market in India. 
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you to the Regional Bank Conference on Development Economics. On behalf of the minister of education, I would like to extend my sincere congratulations for the successful opening of this conference. 
With the theme of higher education and development, this conference has gathered together a number of prominent economists, researchers, policy makers, education experts, and students to discuss and share their views on topics such as higher education and the exchange of skills and talent, higher education and development, technological innovations, integration of the university and industry, and higher education and the labor market. These discussions and exchanges are important both now and in the future because they will help to promote the development of higher education in East Asia, especially in China. 
I would like to take this opportunity to share with you some information on the development of higher education in China. Given the country’s sustained and rapid economic development since the end of 1990s, China has made remarkable progress in expanding and improving its system of higher education. 
First, as a developing country with a large population, China manages the largest system of higher education in the world. From 1998 to 2005, the number of higher education institutions grew from 1,080 to 5,048, an increase of 4.7 times, and the total number of students enrolled in higher education grew from 8 million to 23 million, an increase of 2.9 times. The growth rate of enrollment in higher education also accelerated from 9.8 to 21 percent. China has entered a period of mass higher education, and these developments have laid a solid foundation for enhancing the quality of China’s human resources, for promoting rapid, sustainable, and healthy economic and social development, as well as for supporting reform and development within higher education itself. 
Wu Qidi is vice minister of education, Beijing, China. 
Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics 2008, Regional © 2008 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank 
9 
Opening Address 
WU QIDI 
10 | WU QIDI 
Second, the quality of higher education has improved steadily. The Chinese government considers quality to be the central goal of higher education and is making every effort to balance quality, scale, and outcome. We have initiated and implemented various projects to improve the quality of higher education by reforming and modifying the institutions themselves, the structure of disciplines, and teaching methods. We have also been giving awards for excellence in teaching, developing an outstanding national curriculum, promoting reform of how universities teach English, and assessing undergraduate teaching and the learning process. All of these efforts have energized both teachers and students. 
Third, the conditions in China’s colleges and universities have improved greatly. By 2005, some 2,273 higher education institutions had been established in China, employing more than 1 million teachers. The quality of teaching has been improving. Funds for teaching materials have grown at an annual average rate of 28.7 percent, and the number of library books has increased 15.1 percent annually. As conditions have improved, higher education institutions have been able to operate more efficiently. 
Fourth, breakthroughs have been made in the reform of higher education. Remarkable progress has been achieved in the reform of administrative and financial management. Under the new administrative arrangements, higher education institutions will be managed by a two-tiered system involving both the central and provincial governments, with provincial governments assuming the major role. A number of comprehensive universities have been founded, and this has improved efficiency overall. Great achievements have also been made in personnel and logistics. The policies governing financial assistance and the mechanisms for making financial help available have been improved. Our policy is to offer strong support for students in financial difficulties. 
Fifth, remarkable progress has been made in building world-class universities and key disciplines. Implementation of the so-called 985 and 211 projects through the ninth and tenth five-year plans has supported this effort by constructing universities and expanding their offerings. Today, we are meeting in Beijing University, one of the world-class universities created since 1998. These projects not only have built numerous universities but also have cultivated and retained teachers and researchers with higher-level skills. Our goal remains to conduct world-class research in Chinese universities. Much work remains, and we need to exert more effort in that direction. 
Sixth, the capacity of higher education to serve the needs of society has been strengthened. Our institutions are building their capacity to conduct research in science and technology, to function as think tanks in the humanities and social sciences, and to develop advanced culture and build a well-off, well-rounded society. We are building universities capable of speaking to both sides: science and technology and the humanities and social sciences. 
Seventh, the international status of China’s system of higher education has been enhanced by stronger cooperation between China and other countries. China has established educational cooperation and exchange with 178 countries, regions, and international organizations. In addition, China has signed mutual degree accreditation 
OPENING ADDRESS | 11 
agreements with 32 countries and various regions, including 26 developed countries such as Austria, France, Germany, and the United Kingdom. 
Although remarkable progress has been made, China confronts many difficulties, including insufficient financing, large demand for jobs, growing demand for innovation in science and technology, and shortage of skilled workers. 
The Chinese government has paid a great deal of attention to these problems and is making every effort to address them. New projects are being designed to improve higher education even further, and we welcome the suggestions and discussion of experts from other countries. 
If higher education institutions in the world were regarded as a big international family, then universities and colleges of each country and region would be family members living in mutual connection and cooperation. I hope that this conference will deepen our cooperation and exchanges, making them more extensive and fruitful. On behalf of the minister of education, I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to the World Bank for its continuous support of China’s educational development. Long-term cooperative relationships have been established between the Ministry of Education of China and the World Bank. We look forward to expanding our mutual understanding and strengthening our cooperation in the future, making greater contributions to the development of China’s education. I wish the conference great success and everyone good health while they are in China. 
I would like to begin by thanking the various partners that have made this conference possible. First, I would like to thank the Global Development Network, with which we coordinated over the last three years so that we could hold our two conferences in the same place and at the same time, maximizing externalities between those two events. I would also like to thank our Chinese hosts, who have provided logistical and financial support for this conference, the large group of supporters from Peking University, and the many other groups whose participation and enthusiasm have made this event possible. 
For those of us from the World Bank, this Regional Bank Conference on Development Economics is an important event. It has evolved over the years into a major opportunity for the international research community to focus on development issues of specific relevance in various regions of the world. Its strength lies in bringing together academics from top universities in the world and in the region where the conference is being held. Today, we have participants from no less than a dozen countries, including, of course, a sizable number from East Asia. 
The focus of this conference—higher education and development—is a topic of unquestionable importance for this region and for middle-income countries in general. At relatively low levels of national development, education policy is concentrated, although not exclusively, on broadening the access to and improving the quality of primary education, an emphasis embedded in the United Nations Millennium Development Goals, which seek to achieve universal primary education by 2015. 
But as development proceeds, economic growth brings with it structural transformation that creates growing demand for workers with increasingly higher levels of education, shifting the emphasis from the primary to the secondary level and, increasingly, the university level, often with quite specialized skill profiles. Much of whatFrançois Bourguignon, at the time of this conference, was senior vice president and chief economist of the World Bank In October 2007 he became director of the Paris School of Economics. 
Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics 2008, Regional © 2008 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank 
13 
Opening Address 
FRANÇOIS BOURGUIGNON 
14 | FRANÇOIS BOURGUIGNON 
Minister Wu just said about China illustrates that fantastic transformation and the growing emphasis that has to be put on higher education. 
From that point of view, it is quite interesting that—and I learned this today—the World Bank’s first loan to China was made exactly 26 years ago, and it was done for higher education. Before entering this room, Minister Wu told me about the various World Bank loans for higher education that have benefited China. So, from that point of view, a conference on higher education that is organized by the World Bank and held in Beijing is a natural fit. 
But while the move across educational levels may seem a natural progression for the development process, the transition raises difficult and often vexing questions for policy makers. While primary education can easily be justified for the benefits and basic opportunities it generates for individuals, as well as the broader gains to society from a literate population, the issues become much more complex with higher levels of education. Issues such as who should pay for education, how it should be provided, and how the challenge of the brain drain from higher-skilled occupations should be managed all require special consideration. 
The sessions and keynote speeches that have been organized for this conference are intended to shed some light on these difficult issues. Topics that address how to organize the higher education sector will focus on the financing of higher education and the challenges and opportunities of getting public and private education providers to work together. The role of skills migration and whether it leads to brain drain or, as we say today, “brain circulation,” will also be considered. How best to organize higher education institutions to support innovation will be considered in another session. And, finally, the role of labor markets and institutions in facilitating or, in some cases, hindering the accumulation and use of higher education will be examined. 
We are beginning a two-day conference on an extremely important topic. We have assembled a diverse group of experts to help us to understand the options in the field of higher education. I expect that we will learn a great deal from one another over the next two days. 
Without further fanfare, let me again welcome you all to this Regional Bank Conference on Development Economics. I look forward to our collective engagement during this time together. 
This brief note deals with a subject that lies close to the hearts of the Global Development Network and the World Bank’s Development Economic Vice Presidency: the training and employment of highly skilled labor. Arguably the largest single contrast between developed and developing countries lies in the availability and use of highly skilled labor. One might not want to argue that it is the only cause of the differences in their economic, social, and political outcomes, but it clearly is a major contributor, and successful development will require markets for highly skilled labor that operate with a reasonable degree of social efficiency. I specify social efficiency because there are good reasons to believe that skilled labor creates strong positive externalities, economically (for example, creating opportunities for others to be more productive), socially (delivering services whose value exceeds their cost or price), and even politically (strengthening institutions, improving debate, and enhancing accountability). 
This note advances four simple assertions, which are simple to make, if not to implement or achieve: 
● Universities are central to the training of highly skilled labor. 
● The so-called brain circulation is an important topic for research because, whether positive or negative, its effects are likely to be large. 
● Building capacity to undertake policy research in developing countries is both difficult and important for enhancing development. 
● Since labor is scarce and productive, we should not waste it. 
L. Alan Winters was director of the Development Research Group, the World Bank. He is now professor of economics in the University of Sussex, UK. This note is based on a speech given to the joint dinner of the Global Development Network’s Eighth Annual Conference and the World Bank’s Regional Conference on Development Economics, January 17, 2007, Beijing. The author is grateful to Shahid Yusuf for comments and to Audrey Kitson-Walters and Nina Cunanan for logistical help. 
Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics 2008, Regional © 2008 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank 
15 
Keynote Address Skilled Labor and the International Economy: Whence It Comes, Whither It Goes 
L. ALAN WINTERS 
16 | L. ALAN WINTERS 
I do not offer detailed analysis of these propositions, still less assemble a large body of empirical evidence in their favor, but I hope to offer enough justification to persuade readers that they deserve thought and further research attention. 
The Centrality of Universities 
It is tautological to define universities as central to the creation of highly skilled labor if we define “highly skilled” as having a particular level of undergraduate study, a postgraduate degree, or a certificate issued by a university.1 I want to go beyond tautology and recognize that other routes to high skills are conceivable and, indeed, necessary for some skills; even so, it is plain that almost every highly skilled worker builds on his or her university education. If a country’s universities are closed or short of staff and facilities and if they cannot be substituted for by universities abroad, the level of practical skills within that country is bound to decline. 
Initially, universities were almost exclusively training institutions for high-level professions, especially the church and the law. Their extension to sciences and engineering, which on current views represent the apex of the pyramid of high skills, was a nineteenth-century phenomenon, led by people such as Humboldt (see Yusuf and Nabeshima 2006: chap. 1). From around 1980, however, development theory and practice turned against supporting universities as a means to development in lowincome countries and in favor of boosting primary and, more recently, secondary school enrollment. At the time, this attitude seemed well justified in terms of equity: universities were the preserve of the (currently) rich, and the unit costs of university education were high, whereas primary education would help to unlock the capacities of all. Moreover, since primary education was necessary for students to advance to secondary and tertiary levels, extending the former’s enrollment would enhance the benefits of the latter by increasing the pool from which they could draw. Secondary enrollment was later justified as a necessary step to obtaining tertiary education for some and as a key to improving manufacturing productivity. 
As we enter the twenty-first century, however, the earlier stages of education are generally starting to show stronger enrollment, and the emphasis in economic performance is increasingly on the quality of education, skills, innovation, and flexibility (Hanushek and Woessmann 2007). As a result, it is now widely accepted that the neglect of universities has been allowed to go too far Developing countries are seeking to boost their universities and to define their role in promoting development (see, for example, Hershberg, Nabeshima, and Yusuf 2007, which deals with universityindustry linkages in Asia and a similar project under way in the World Bank for Africa). Moreover, in many cases the impetus is as much from the private as from the public sector. 
Nowhere is progress faster than in India and China, where expenditure, university formation, and student enrollment are all booming. In India, the number of colleges and universities has increased from around 5,000 to 12,000 since 1990; there are now 3 million graduates per year, of whom 400,000 are engineers (United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization, UNESCO). In China, 
SKILLED LABOR AND THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY | 17 
between 1997 and 2005, the number of ‘regular’ higher education institutions nearly doubled to 1792 , and admissions to all tertiary institutions quintupled from about 1.1 million to 5.7 million. Admissions to post-graduate degree courses numbers 365 thousand. Of nearly a million first degree students in 2003, over half studied science and engineering subjects. (All these statistics are from Li and others 2008.) 
These numbers are staggering and seem to suggest that India and China will shortly swamp the global market for graduates and engineers. But, in fact, that is not true. First, both countries are faced with rapidly rising domestic demand. In India, experienced software engineers and managers more generally are beginning to command salaries on the same order of magnitude as in the United States and, especially, Europe. In China, the demand for skills in general management, teaching, and public administration is strong enough to absorb all of the graduates produced well into the future (Winters and Yusuf 2007). 
Second, there are questions about quality. Both India and China have some excellent institutions of learning, but they also have many very weak ones, with poor curricula, poor standards, and weak links between learning outcomes and qualifications granted. The McKinsey Institute (2005) argues that only 25 percent of Indian and 10 percent of Chinese engineering graduates have the skills required to work at their nominal skill level in an international company. Some of this reflects language difficulties and immobility for noneconomic reasons, but much reflects weak curricula, inadequately trained and motivated teaching staff, and the lack of effective measures for enforcing quality. 
Thus, while increasing global supply will presumably constrain the rates of return to tertiary education somewhat, they are likely to remain high enough to warrant more training efforts and expenditure in both developed and developing countries well into the current century (see, for example, Freeman 2006). 
The Brain Drain Warrants More Research 
Creating a stock of highly skilled labor is not the same as keeping and using it, and these are the issues I turn to now. Highly skilled workers are highly mobile, both nationally and internationally. They generally provide services that their host communities want (for example, medicine) or that create better jobs for locals (for example, engineering design), and they face fewer challenges in integrating into these communities. Highly skilled workers generally have the means to move, being less prone to liquidity constraints, and greater ability to find jobs outside their home country because, compared with less-skilled workers, they have better networks and their jobs are more frequently subject to advertising and explicit qualifications. 
We do not know yet whether—or, perhaps more precisely, under which circumstances— the loss of highly skilled labor (the brain drain) is detrimental or beneficial. Strong arguments have been made on both sides of this debate, and the answer is almost certainly context specific. Commander, Kangasniemi, and Winters (2004) offer one of several surveys that have been undertaken, and I do not repeat the arguments here. I just want to make two separate points that have long fascinated me. 
18 | L. ALAN WINTERS 
First, given that there are economies of agglomeration in use of the most highly skilled labor, I hypothesize that a threefold classification of countries is significant. India and China have, respectively, the third and sixth largest overseas diasporas of skilled labor (graduate level and above) in the world (Docquier and Marfouk 2005). The others in the top six are, in declining size, the United Kingdom, the Philippines, Mexico, and Germany. However, as a percentage of all graduates, the émigrés account for 4.3 percent for India and 3.8 percent for China. Provided that there is not huge positive selection (that is, that not only the very brightest leave), these are probably manageable proportions. In other words, India and China are probably large enough that no plausible amount of emigration to developed countries will undermine their ability to create viable agglomerations of skills. Brain drain could still raise issues about who pays for training, but the effects are essentially marginal. 
Now consider, say, Jamaica and Guyana, where 85 and 89 percent, respectively, of nationals (defined as having been born there) with degrees reside abroad. The provision of high-level services may suffer in these economies, but realistically they are so small that efficiently sized agglomerations of high skills probably would never emerge. Again, there may be losses on the margin, but it is plausible that the only efficient thing for Guyanese high-fliers to do is to relocate abroad, even in terms of social efficiency.2 Finally, consider, say, Ghana (population 22 million) or Mozambique (19 million). These economies might aspire to agglomerations of skills in certain sectors, and the brain drain—47 and 45 percent, respectively, of all national degree holders reside abroad—may prevent them from emerging. In these middle-size economies, the effect of the brain drain might not be marginal—that is, it might induce a different type of equilibrium. 
This hypothesis applies, if at all, to the highest levels of skill. At lower levels of graduate attainment, agglomeration economies are probably less strong but still positive, and so brain drain concerns may arise for smaller countries. Mauritius (population 1.5 million) is said to have difficulty transitioning to a more knowledgeintensive economic structure because of the shortage of skills. Even in the provision of primary health care, there may be some agglomeration effects in terms of learning and peer groups, which seem a priori to have constant returns to scale above a very low threshold core. 
The second point I want to make is that the possibility of migration may affect the propensity to become highly skilled and hence the stock of highly skilled workers remaining in a country. This was first observed formally in the “beneficial brain drain” literature stemming from Mountford (1997). Migration raises the return to education. If, starting from zero, the probability of a skilled person migrating increases to p, the expected returns to education increase by pD, where D is the difference in skilled labor earnings at home and abroad. If this increases the proportion obtaining education by q, the number of people with education in the home economy will increase if (1 q) (1 p), that is, if more people start to obtain an education at home than leave. 
Several conditions are required for this argument to apply—for example, that training places are not rationed as they often are for, say, doctors (that is, that education numbers can actually increase) and that p applies equally to anyone who gets 
SKILLED LABOR AND THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY | 19 
educated (see Commander, Kangasniemi, and Winters 2004). The latter condition essentially means that overseas employers do not screen out the people who took education only because the possibility of migration had been introduced. If, as seems possible, the brightest would have found it worthwhile to get educated anyway, whereas the “second division” required the incentives of extra rewards to make it worthwhile, this amounts to saying that overseas employers cannot or do not screen by ability. My recent work with colleagues suggests that screening and the apparent insensitivity of education decisions to migration make the beneficial brain drain unlikely to apply to doctors (Kangasniemi, Winters, and Commander 2004), whereas for information technology specialists, the hypothesis seems quite plausible (Commander and others 2008). 
A further wrinkle is that the beneficial brain drain can operate in reverse. McKenzie and Rapoport (2006) have shown that the opportunity to migrate to the United States to do an unskilled job is reducing secondary school enrollment among Mexican males. Giles and de Brauw (2006) have identified the same phenomenon in rural-urban internal migration in China. 
Building Capacity for Policy Research 
This section is more parochial than the rest of the paper. It is predicated on the assertion—I would like to say “fact”—that developing countries, especially the poorest, would benefit from greater capacity to analyze policy options in a rigorous, research-based fashion, especially in the areas of economic and social policy. Building such capacity is, in my opinion, the most important of the Global Development Network’s objectives, and it is shared by the World Bank. 
Policy research capacity entails more than just tertiary education.3 It requires highly skilled researchers and experienced project managers, incentives for policy to be subjected to rigorous high-quality analysis, and the existence of institutions that can provide the environment and tools for research and provide continuity so that the whole enterprise does not collapse if a single individual leaves. 
The problem is that policy research suffers from weak market incentives and sometimes from market failures in the classical sense. Thus there is a public good element to policy research: why not just let someone else do it? In addition, the international publishability and kudos of policy research often fall short of those of theory, methodology, and tests of apparently universal hypotheses; developing countries often cannot generate the volume of policy research needed to make developing tools and institutions to simplify it seem worthwhile; the return on policy research is also uncertain and difficult to pin down; governments are sometimes hostile to independent research; and successful researchers are often bid away by the private sector or by government so that institutions and cultures of policy research never take root. There is nothing wrong with talented people working in the private sector or in government—indeed, we should encourage it— but society also benefits from the presence of an established independent research capacity. 
20 | L. ALAN WINTERS 
How should we tackle these weaknesses? The market failures suggest that there is a case for public support, so this is partly a matter of how institutions like the Global Development Network and the World Bank should spend their money. A necessary input is training and longer-term mentoring of policy researchers in developing countries: not just degrees and general research skills, but also training oriented toward the intricacies of real policy. The provision of tools is important, too, such as access to library facilities, data, and analytical tools with which to carry out relatively standard analyses. Nearly all researchers draw on networks of peers, partly for support (validation that what they do is worthwhile), partly for advice and support on approaches, and partly as stimuli and competition (which is uncomfortable at times but nearly always constructive). It is also important to give researchers individual incentives for good work. Researchers rarely seek riches, but relatively small rewards can greatly increase their motivation and also their self-esteem and status within society. Finally, supporters of capacity building must recognize the importance of institutions: supporting their development, being prepared to pay some part of their overhead, and sticking with them over difficult patches. 
This shopping list is formidable. It is clearly expensive and long term, and it requires a great deal of judgment, confidence, patience, and resilience on the part of the donors. It requires far more than the research support budgets of the Global Development Network and the World Bank but is, I believe, very worthwhile indeed. It is a call to international donors to approach capacity building in consistent and determined ways, which we have seen in the past (see the example in SIDA 2006), but on a broader front than heretofore. 
Making Efficient Use of Skilled Labor 
René Descartes said, “It is not enough to have a good mind; the main thing is to use it well.” So it is for countries. The previous sections deal essentially with the supply of highly skilled labor. This final section deals with demand. It urges us not to waste the skilled labor that we have. 
One possible problem in the market for highly skilled labor is a lack of demand: people obtain skills but find no productive use for them. It has been a criticism of many developing countries in the past that their productive structures and methods of production generate too few skilled jobs. This can be the case particularly after periods of conflict and destruction. The problem may be manifest in brain waste (people not using the skills they have), brain drain (people leaving), or unemployment. An unemployed elite can pose serious problems for political stability as well as simple waste. 
The solutions to deficient demand will vary from country to country, but they will include allowing wages to clear the market (that is, labor market flexibility) even if this discourages the acquisition of skills, ensuring the realistic pricing of tertiary education (which presumably will discourage the acquisition of at least some skills), relaxing the barriers to the creation of firms and entrepreneurship of either a bureaucratic (regulatory) or economic (for example, access to finance) nature, encouraging demand for certain services associated with externalities (for example, the provision of health 
SKILLED LABOR AND THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY | 21 
or education services), providing integrated training to meet the needs of specific industries, as the Japanese and Koreans did, and altering university courses to foster problem solving and innovation (see Bengt-Åke Lundvall’s paper in this volume). 
The main problem I want to address, however, is the obverse one: excessive demand for highly skilled labor for activities with low social returns (which could, of course, coexist with deficient demand in other sectors). I illustrate this with examples from two areas. 
First, the aid business. Rajan and Subramanian (2005) have argued from macro data that aid flows harm growth by bidding up the price of skilled labor. I do not find their results wholly convincing, but there is quite enough direct evidence of the burden that donor engagement places on poor countries’ analytical capacity to corroborate the dangers for skilled labor markets. For example, the fragmentation of aid flows, which is manifestly increasing (World Bank 2007), means that Tanzania’s government prepares about 2,000 documents for donors and receives more than 1,000 donor delegations each year (World Bank 2004). In some African countries, senior policy makers spend half or more of their time dealing with donors and international financial institutions (World Bank 2000). This is compared with the interpretation of surveys conducted by private sector firms, which generally hold that managements that spend 10 percent or more of their time dealing with governments are being unduly distracted from their proper functions. Not only does aid distract government officials, but it also diverts them into tasks whose priority may seem obvious to donors, but not to anyone else. In Kenya a World Bank agricultural project paid eight local staff $3,000 to $6,000 per month, compared with the $250 per month that senior economists could earn in the civil service. Of 20 Kenyan economists receiving a master’s degree from a donor-funded program over 1977–85, 15 were working for aid agencies or nongovernmental organizations by 1994 (World Bank 2004). Doubtless many did useful work, but the cost to Kenya’s ability to analyze and implement policy seems very high. 
The Paris Declaration of March 2005 aimed to improve the delivery of aid in many of these sorts of dimensions. To quantify its challenges and as a start toward measuring its impact, its authors (the OECD’s Development Assistance Committee) undertook a baseline survey in 2006. This suggested, for example, that less than a quarter of aid missions were conducted jointly by more than one donor. It also found that donors had established 1,767 parallel implementation units (World Bank 2007). And as the wider aid community, including nongovernmental organizations and foundations, becomes ever more enamored of vertical funds (for example, for acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, tuberculosis, primary education), the situation seems likely to worsen rather than improve. 
The second area in which I feel we waste scarce resources is one I know better: the trading system. Trade negotiations are very complex, but given their sensitivity domestically and the apparent power of the World Trade Organization (WTO) to impose its rules on the governments of small countries, governments take them very seriously. Thus if they do not trust their partners to respect their interests and realistically recognize that the WTO Secretariat cannot do so, they feel obliged to devote considerable resources to monitoring negotiations. A typical WTO week in Geneva has about fifty 
22 | L. ALAN WINTERS 
committee meetings. At the Hong Kong Ministerial Meeting in December 2005, the delegation of the European Union was said to number 832 people, that of the United States 356, and that of Japan 229 (World Development Movement Press Release, December 14, 2005). The World Development Movement bemoaned the asymmetry of the situation, which found, say, three Burundians trying to keep track of these hoards, and I agree. But is it better to be Uganda (with a population four times that of Burundi), which sent 66 people? Is this really an optimal use of the delegates’ time and attention, even if all of their other costs are paid for by donors? 
Even worse, in my opinion, is the effort that goes into negotiating regional trading arrangements. Prominent at the moment is the European Union initiative to negotiate economic partnership agreements with the Africa, Caribbean, and Pacific states, but think of the effort that has gone into the Free Trade Area of the Americas. On the whole, such regional arrangements offer developing countries very little and the world trading system less, and yet they are complex and detailed.4 I have never managed to persuade any government to estimate the direct costs of engaging in these negotiations (staff time and travel), let alone the indirect ones of political and bureaucratic distraction. Yet even a passing acquaintance with their duration and complexity suggests that the costs could be huge. 
Moreover, not only do negotiations absorb skilled policy capacity, but their outcome does as well. The Uruguay Round imposed on developing countries technical and health standards administration, customs valuation requirements, and a complex intellectual property regime, plus the need for increased regulatory oversight if services were to be liberalized. The donor community and economists also urge developing countries to integrate themselves more firmly in the operation of the trading system: do more at the WTO, make more use of dispute settlement, have greater participation in international standards bodies such as Codex Alimentarius to ensure that developing-country views are represented, and so forth. All of these absorb skilled labor but are rather bureaucratic in nature. If the best use of highly skilled labor is to send it to meetings in Geneva, we ought to ask how we came to make the environment so hostile for developing countries. 
In Winters (2001a) I make several suggestions to try to arrest and reverse this waste of resources. Predictably, they have had no effect. Here, with so many economists collected together, let me try another tack. As policy-focused economists, we are the principal beneficiaries of these make-work schemes: they bid up our rates. If we said “enough,” we might be heard.5 There would still be plenty of work for us to do, even if some of it were less glamorous (customs reform, say, instead of flying to Geneva), and it would probably be more useful. 
Conclusion 
Highly skilled labor is one of the magic ingredients of development, yet there is much we do not know about it or how to manage it. The research agenda about how to produce it and allocate it across space is large and challenging, but in the meantime, I can safely assert that we should not waste it. 
SKILLED LABOR AND THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY | 23 
Notes 
1. I have a fairly broad definition of university in mind here that would include tertiary institutions such as the grand écoles in France, even though they are formally separate from that country’s university system. 2. There is hardly any point in being the only nuclear physicist in Guyana. 3. This section draws on an unpublished note prepared by my colleague Bernard Hoekman 
on behalf of the Development Research Group in the World Bank. 4. I believe the limited value of economic partnership agreements was plain from the start. Indeed, it was implicit in the European Union’s own green paper on post-Lomé trading arrangements (European Commission 1997). Winters (2001b), written in 1987–88, summarizes my views and counterproposal. History has done nothing to change my mind. 5. G. H. Hardy is reported to have said, “If the Archbishop of Canterbury declares that he believes in God, that is all in the way of business, but if he declares that he does not, we may take it that he means what he says.” 
References 
Commander, Simon, Rupa Chanda, Mari Kangasniemi, and L. Alan Winters. 2008. “Must Skilled Migration Be a Brain Drain? Evidence from the Indian Software Industry.” The World Economy 31 (2, February): 187–211. Commander, Simon, Mari Kangasniemi, and L. Alan Winters. 2004. “The Brain Drain: Curse or Boon? A Survey of the Literature.” In Challenges to Globalization: Analyzing the Economics, ed. Robert E. Baldwin and L. Alan Winters. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research. Docquier, Frédérick, and Abdeslam Marfouk. 2006. “International Migration by Education Attainment, 1990–2000.” In International Migration, Remittances, and the Brain Drain, ed. Caglar Ozden and Maurice Schiff. Basingstoke: Palgrave McMillan. European Commission. 1997. Green Paper on Relations between the European Union and the ACP Countries on the Eve of the 21st Century: Challenges and Options for a New Partnership. Brussels: European Commission. Freeman, Richard B. 2006. “Is a Great Labor Shortage Coming? Replacement Demand in the Global Economy.” NBER Working Paper 12541, National Bureau for Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Giles, John, and Alan de Brauw. 2006. Migrant Opportunity and the Educational Attainment of Youth in Rural China. IZA Discussion Paper 2326. Bonn: Institute for the Study of Labor. Hanushek, Eric A., and Ludger Woessmann. 2007. “The Role of School Improvement in Economic Development.” NBER Working Paper 12832, National Bureau for Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Hershberg, Eric, Kaoru Nabeshima, and Shahid Yusuf, eds. 2007. “University-Industry Link
ages in Metropolitan Areas in Asia.” World Development 35 (6, June): 931–1098. Kangasniemi, Mari, L. Alan Winters, and Simon Commander. 2004. “Is the Medical Brain Drain Beneficial? Evidence from Overseas Doctors in the U.K.” Social Science and Medicine 65 (February): 915–23. Li, Yao, John Whalley, Shunming Zhang, and Xiliang Zhao. 2008. “The higher educational transformation of China and its global implications.” NBER Working Paper 13849, Cambridge, Mass. McKenzie, David, and Hillel Rapoport. 2006. “Can Migration Reduce Educational Attainment? Evidence from Mexico.” Policy Research Working Paper 3952, World Bank, Washington, DC, June. 
24 | L. ALAN WINTERS 
McKinsey Institute. 2005. The Emerging Global Labor Market. San Francisco: McKinsey and 
Company. Mountford, Andrew. 1997. “Can a Brain Drain Be Good for Growth in the Source Econo
my?” Journal of Development Economics 53 (2): 287–303. Rajan, Raghavan, and Arvind Subramanian. 2005. “What Undermines Aid’s Impact on Growth?” IMF Working Paper WP/05/126, International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C. SIDA (Swedish Development Cooperation Agency). 2006. Research Capacity: Towards the 
Millennium Goals. Stockholm: SIDA, Department for Research Cooperation. Winters, L. Alan. 2001a. “Harnessing Trade for Development.” In Making Globalization Work for the Poor: The European Contribution; The Need for Coherence. Stockholm: Ministry of Foreign Affairs. ———. 2001b. “Post-Lomé Trading Arrangements: The Multilateral Alternative.” In Regionalism in Europe: Geometries and Strategies after 2000, ed. Jürgen von Hagen and Mika Widgren. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Winters, L. Alan, and Shahid Yusuf. 2007. Dancing with Giants: China and India and the 
Global Economy. Washington, DC: World Bank; Singapore: Institute for Policy Studies. World Bank. 2000. Can Africa Claim the Twenty-first Century? Washington DC: World Bank. ———. 2004. World Development Report 2004: Making Services Work for Poor People. New 
York: Oxford University Press. ———. 2007. Global Monitoring Report, 2007: Confronting the Challenges of Gender Equal
ity and Fragile States. Washington, DC: World Bank. Yusuf, Shahid, and Kaoru Nabeshima. 2006. How Universities Promote Economic Growth. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. 
A lesson of basic economics is that understanding markets requires paying attention to both quantities and prices. Prices serve as a market signal about the costs of producing goods and services and possibly also about the relative scarcity of those goods and services. Thus analyzing the evolution of prices should reveal something about the evolution of technology and the tension between supply and demand. 
The higher education market is no exception. Much of the analysis of higher education in developing countries focuses on quantity—the share of the cohort going on to tertiary education—and sometimes also on the costs to the government or consumers of expanding that share. But equally important are the returns to higher education, which represent the relative price of the skills that come with tertiary education. Their level depends on the costs of higher education, but in disequilibrium the returns also rise or fall as gaps emerge or close between the supply of and demand for highly educated workers. These prices can provide essential signals of these tensions. 
This paper investigates three questions. First, do we see any common global trend (especially across the developing world) toward higher returns to higher education, as we saw in the United States in the 1970s and 1980s? If so, what is causing the trends in returns and is the trend likely to be structural or transitory? Finally, what policy issues have to be considered in responding to these trends, in particular to ensure that the supply of workers with a tertiary education can adjust upward? 
Trends in Returns 
This section brings together recent evidence on changes in the returns to tertiary education and reveals a widespread trend toward a widening wage premium for a university education. A word of caution is in order, however. Because of a lack of goodFrançois Bourguignon is director of the Paris School of Economics; he wrote this article when he was senior vice president and chief economist of the World Bank. F. Halsey Rogers is senior economist of the Development Research Group of the World Bank. 
Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics 2008, Regional © 2008 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank 
25 
Keynote Address Global Returns to Higher Education: Trends, Drivers, and Policy Responses 
FRANÇOIS BOURGUIGNON AND F. HALSEY ROGERS 
26 | FRANÇOIS BOURGUIGNON AND F. HALSEY ROGERS 
trend data for a large number of countries, this conclusion is necessarily somewhat speculative. The same is true, only more so, for the answers to the other questions addressed below. The goal of this paper is to provoke discussion about trends; we do not expect full agreement on the diagnosis, let alone the prognosis. 
In thinking about trends in returns, it is useful to have the following basic framework in mind: 
(1) log wi rP*Pi rS*Si rH*Hi other variables, 
On the left-hand side, this equation has the log of earnings of an individual i in the population of wage earners. On the right-hand side, in this very simple formulation, there are three dummy variables, P, S, and H, which represent primary, secondary, and higher education, respectively. The coefficients associated with the variables, rP, rS, and rH, are the marginal returns to primary, secondary, and higher education. The question, then, is how earnings depend on those three levels of education, once we have controlled for other variables that influence the earnings of an individual: his or her age, the city, area, or region of a country in which he or she lives, and so on. 
The marginal return to higher education, in this equation, is defined by rH. That parameter represents exactly how much a university graduate earns on average (controlling for other characteristics), when compared to individuals with only a secondary school degree. This is the definition of “returns” used in this paper. (Note that it is not the usual Mincerian specification, where each year of schooling is assumed to yield the same return.) When the labor market is at equilibrium, this rH should be high enough to compensate the student for the costs of attending university—both the opportunity costs of the forgone earnings that the student would have obtained by going directly to the labor market and, of course, all of the direct private costs of higher education. 
A slightly more sophisticated specification of this equation would replace the variables P, S, and H with the number of years of education the worker has completed at the respective level of the educational system. In that case, the coefficients rP, rS, rH would represent the rates of return corresponding to each year of study at these different levels of education.1 
This equation allows us to better formulate the question of the trend in returns to higher education: how is this rH coefficient changing over time? To answer this question, we draw on analyses that have been carried out in many different countries. Let us start with two examples from our own research that illustrate what we have in mind. The first case is from Indonesia. Alatas and Bourguignon (2005) analyze the evolution of income distribution in that country, and part of the analysis relies on assessing the change in the earnings function in that country. One of the drivers of the change was the rH coefficient. Between 1980 and 1996, during the era of very rapid growth before the financial crisis struck in 1997, the return to getting a university degree—again, compared with a secondary degree only—rose from 40 to 60 percent. As there was no clear sign in this period of an increase in the cost of tertiary education, a natural conclusion in that the rapid-growth era led to a shortage of tortiary-educated workers and increased substantially the relative return to higher education. 
GLOBAL RETURNS TO HIGHER EDUCATION | 27 
FIGURE 1 Returns to Education for Urban Males in Colombia, 1988–95 
Colombia: change in returns to education 1988–1995 (urban males) 30 
25s gninraen ie gnahc15Source: Vélez and others (2005). 
The second example, taken from the same volume, examines the case of Colombia (Vélez and others 2005; see figure 1). The interpretation here is somewhat different: rather than seeing the rH from the Indonesian case, we instead have the change in labor market returns by years of education between 1988 and 1995. The horizontal axis gives the number of years of schooling, while the vertical axis represents the change between 1988 and 1995 in the earnings corresponding to each number of years of schooling, once we have controlled for other explanatory variables. 
The U-shape of this curve means that, during this period, both primary school graduates (on the left) and higher education graduates (on the right) gained relative to secondary school graduates, who are exactly in the middle of the distribution. By comparing the right-hand part of this parabola with the middle portion, we see that the return rH rose 15 to 20 percent between 1988 and 1995. 
In these two countries, then, there has been an increase in the return to higher education in the recent period. These examples also illustrate the importance of being precise about the period we are examining. In the case of Colombia, for example, if instead of looking at the 1988–95 period, we look at the preceding decade, we would see not a U-shaped curve but a downward-sloping one. In that earlier period, in other words, the relative return to higher education declined. Thus the timing of the analysis is very important. 
Does this pattern of increasing returns generalize to other countries? Table 1 summarizes the results of a number of studies that have analyzed trends in returns to higher education. 
In the case of the United States, the increase in the college wage premium has been the subject of extensive research. The literature burgeoned in the 1990s, as 2010% 50 51 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Years of schooling 
TABLE 1. Trends in Relative Returns to Tertiary Education in Developing Countries during the 1980s and 1990s 
Trend in relative returns to tertiary Region and country education, 1980s–90sa Source 
Developing and transition economies Latin America 
Argentina Increase De Ferranti and others (2003) Bolivia Increase De Ferranti and others (2003) Brazil (urban) Increase De Ferranti and others (2003) Brazil Increase Arabsheibani, Carneiro, and Henley (2006) Chile Flat De Ferranti and others (2003) Colombia Increase De Ferranti and others (2003); Vélez and others 
(2005); Blom and Hansen (2002) Mexico Increase De Ferranti and others (2003); Legovini, Bouillón, 
and Lustig (2005); López-Acevedo (2001) Venezuela Flat Patrinos and Sakellariou (2004) 
East Asia 
China Increase Li (2003) China-Taipei Increase Bourguignon, Fournier, and Gurgand (2005) China-Taipei Flat Vere (2005) Indonesia Increase Alatas and Bourguignon (2005) 
Eastern Europe 
Czech Rep. Increase Chase (1998); Munich, Svejnar, and Terrell (2005) Russia Increase Gorodnichenko and Sabirianova Peter (2005) Slovakia Increase Chase (1998) Ukraine Increase Gorodnichenko and Sabirianova Peter (2005) 
High-income economies (OECD) Australia Flat Malagen (1994)b; Borland and others (2000)b Austria Decrease Brunello, Comi, and Lucifora (2000); Fersterer and 
Winter-Ebmer (2003) Denmark Increase Brunello, Comi, and Lucifora (2000) Finland Flat Brunello, Comi, and Lucifora (2000) France Flat Brunello, Comi, and Lucifora (2000) Germany Flat Brunello, Comi, and Lucifora (2000) Greece Decrease (1980s), Tsaklogou and Cholezas (2005)b 
increase (1990s) Italy Increase Brunello, Comi, and Lucifora (2000) Netherlands Flat Brunello, Comi, and Lucifora (2000) Norway (1980s) Flat Hoegeland, Klette, and Salvanes (1999) Portugal Increase Cardoso (2004)b Sweden (1980s) Decrease Palme and Wright (1998) Sweden (1990s) Increase Gustavsson (2004)b Switzerland Increase Brunello, Comi, and Lucifora (2000) United Kingdom Increase Brunello, Comi, and Lucifora (2000) United States Increase Fortin (2006) 
a. Refers to tertiary returns relative to returns to secondary education. 
b. As cited in Machin and McNally (2007). These works are not included in the reference list. See Machin and McNally (2007) for the full citations. 
28 
GLOBAL RETURNS TO HIGHER EDUCATION | 29 
researchers tried to explain the rapid increase in the premium in the late 1970s and throughout the 1980s. Since then, the college premium has continued to rise in the United States, and several other high-income countries have shown a similar pattern. While this is a broad trend, table 1 shows that it is not universal among Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries. In Austria, both the relative and the absolute returns to higher education decreased during the 1980s and 1990s. There is some evidence that the same happened in both Greece and Sweden in the 1980s, although in Sweden the largest declines in returns apparently took place in the previous decade.2 Below, we return to a possible explanation for these exceptions to the trend of rising relative returns. 
In the case of middle-income countries, information on trends in the college wage premium is most abundant for Latin America, thanks in large part to a recent flagship publication by the World Bank’s Latin America division (de Ferranti and others 2003). Table 1 shows that in several Latin American countries—Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, and Mexico—the relative rate of return to higher education rose in recent years. Again, this trend was not universal: in Chile and Venezuela, relative returns were stagnant, for reasons explored below. 
In East Asia, the college premium appears to be rising in China, as might be expected in the wake of that country’s economic transition. In an examination of trends in China-Taipei, the evidence is mixed: Bourguignon, Fournier, and Gurgand (2005) found that returns rose from the 1980s up through the mid-1990s, although a study incorporating more recent data suggests that the widening of the premium has stopped (Vere 2005). A third East Asian case is Indonesia, where, as noted, relative returns grew substantially during the 1980s and first half of the 1990s. 
Finally, the relative returns to higher education have increased substantially in some countries in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, probably in part because the economic transition in the region stimulated the demand for skills. 
Unfortunately, we lack estimates of trends for most other developing countries, often because of the dearth of consistent time-series data on tertiary returns. Clearly there is much more to learn. We would like to know, in particular, whether returns are also increasing in low-income countries. Nevertheless, the evidence currently avai lable suggests that in many countries the relative returns to higher education tended to increase in the 1980s and 1990s. Furthermore, based on this limited evidence, the trend appears to be even more consistent in the middle-income countries than in the OECD. 
Drivers of Higher Returns 
What is driving the increase in the college wage premium across many countries? There are two main possibilities. The first is that the costs of providing a tertiary education have risen relative to the costs of providing a secondary education. The second is that in many countries the demand for tertiary skills has grown faster than their supply, so their price—the relative salaries of college-educated workers—has been bid up. In this section, we argue that increasing relative costs are unlikely to be 
30 | FRANÇOIS BOURGUIGNON AND F. HALSEY ROGERS 
the explanation; the remainder of the paper therefore focuses on the second possibility, the disequilibrium between demand and supply. 
Whether this disequilibrium is transitory and self-equilibrating or more permanent is a crucial issue for education policy. If it is transitory, then higher college wage premiums are a signal that elicits greater investment in higher education and leads to a more productive society in the long run. But if rigidities in the education system or economy sustain the disequilibrium for an extended period of time, higher premiums will have the effect of exacerbating inequalities without inducing a beneficial supplyside response. 
Do Rising Costs of Tertiary Education Explain the Increasing College Wage Premium? 
Directly assessing the first possibility for a large number of countries is difficult, particularly in the case of developing and transition economies. For example, a major task force convened by the World Bank several years ago to analyze higher education in developing countries had little to say about the costs of higher education, other than to bemoan the “lack of data on education costs” at the tertiary level (World Bank 2000). 
But there are reasons to doubt that the costs of higher education have increased dramatically relative to the costs of secondary education. One factor that could spur rising tertiary costs is Baumol’s cost disease (Baumol 1967): if productivity in the economy as a whole is rising, relative costs will increase in any sector that does not make significant productivity gains. Because the technology of tertiary education appears at first blush to have changed little in recent decades, we might expect real costs of tertiary education to rise. However, given that secondary education suffers from sluggish productivity growth for the same reasons, this factor is unlikely to have raised the real relative costs of tertiary education. 
Even if the relative costs of providing a tertiary education have not risen sharply, the relative costs paid by the student and his or her family could have. For this story to be correct, there would have to have been a widespread shifting of costs from the public sector onto households, either through an increase in the enrollment share of private universities or through higher tuition and fees at public universities. Data from the OECD are mixed on this question. While the private share of direct higher education expenses was stable in a majority of OECD countries between the early 1990s and 2003, several, including Australia, Canada, Italy, and Mexico, among others, saw the private share increase by more than 10 percentage points (Karkkainnen 2006). We do not know of similar estimates covering a wide sample of developing and transition countries. But a public-to-private demand shift of this order of magnitude is not large enough to explain the increases in college wage premium observed in many of the countries listed in Table 1.3 
Consequently, it appears that the main driver is an imbalance between demand and supply, with the increase in college wage premium reflecting a growing gap between the two, as argued for the United States by Goldin and Katz (2007). Either 
GLOBAL RETURNS TO HIGHER EDUCATION | 31 
demand for skilled and educated workers has increased very rapidly—much more rapidly than supply, that is—or else supply has stagnated. 
Why the Drivers Matter for Policy 
Understanding the sources of higher returns is crucial, not only for predicting future trends, but also for designing policy. On the demand side, there is considerable evidence (discussed below) that the demand for skilled labor is rising for technical reasons, either because the skill requirements of production processes within given sectors are rising or because the economy is shifting toward sectors of production that make greater use of skilled labor. Assuming that demand will continue to shift, then any adjustment that might reduce the college wage premium will probably have to take place on the supply side of the market. This supply side is the focus of the remainder of this paper. 
Depending on the dynamics of the supply response, either of two cases could hold sway. The first is the self-equilibrating case: in the face of imbalances between demand and supply that are raising the returns to higher education, we might expect a surge in the supply of skilled workers as students or workers try to take advantage of those higher returns. This case has several implications. First, the key features of the current disequilibrium situation—the trend toward higher returns to tertiary education and the widening inequality between skilled and unskilled workers (or highly skilled and less highly skilled workers)—should prove to be temporary. Second, if the demand is governed by increases or changes in technical factors, the rapid supply response will allow the economy as a whole to take advantage of the increase in productivity that lies behind the increase in demand for skills. Third, if highly skilled people have positive externalities that benefit less skilled people, then this case may be consistent with a rapid growth path for the economy. 
The second, less encouraging, case might be called the growth-limiting equilibrium. Assume instead that the response by the supply side is weak—for example, because of restrictions on the growth of the tertiary sector—so that few workers are able to take advantage of the outward shift in demand by earning those higher-skill returns. In this case, the initial increase in inequality may prove permanent, and economic growth may stagnate. 
Clearly, making good policy will depend on understanding which of these cases applies in a given context. Are the high college wage premiums structural or merely transitory? If the increase in returns is expected to persist only temporarily until a robust tertiary sector has time to respond by increasing supply, then no further government response may be necessary. But if the growth-limiting case applies, a more vigorous role for government may be necessary. 
The Race between Demand for and Supply of Skills 
What is the evidence on those drivers of higher returns? A large number of studies have been done on the OECD countries, starting with the United States. As noted, 
32 | FRANÇOIS BOURGUIGNON AND F. HALSEY ROGERS 
this literature has tended to show a global trend toward rising demand for skills. But within individual countries, trends in returns to skills depend on a complex and country-specific interaction of supply and demand. On the demand side, some shifts are linked to technological change, while others are linked to changes in the central structure of those economies. To see how these shifts affect returns, of course, we have to take into account supply features that are linked to the functioning of the university system and its capacity to respond to changes in prices. This capacity is highly context specific, which may explain why the same general global trend toward rising demand for skills has different consequences in different countries. 
And, of course, the functioning of the labor market itself and the country’s labor market policies are important. A recent paper by Card and DiNardo (2002) challenges the widely held view that the changes in the skills gap are best explained by skills-biased technical change. Instead, they stress the effects of the drop in the relative value of the minimum wage; according to this view, the increase in returns to higher education primarily would reflect changes not at the top but at the bottom of the distribution. 
Nevertheless, the preponderance of the literature suggests that if the supply of tertiary-educated people were held constant, then in most countries the relative returns to tertiary education would be rising. A recent reexamination of the evidence by Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2005) reaffirms the view that skill-biased technical change is responsible for observed shifts in wage distribution, including increases in the college wage premium. 
Although no such sophisticated analysis of the demand side is available for most developing countries, several good studies have focused on the supply side. Two cases from Latin America—Brazil and Chile—suffice to illustrate how diverging patterns of supply response can lead to widely different changes in wages. 
Figure 2 shows the evolution of relative supply of and wages for highly skilled workers in Brazil since the 1960s. Specifically, the relative wage is the wage for workers with higher education relative to the wage for those with only secondary education, while relative supply is the number of people in the labor force with higher education versus the number of people in the labor force with only secondary education. 
Relative wages of highly skilled workers rose substantially in the 1980s and 1990s in Brazil, while the relative supply of those workers declined. In Brazil, therefore, increases in the college wage premium seem to have been caused not by strong growth in demand but rather by slow growth in the relative supply of skills. As a consequence, we would expect the rise in relative wages to be accompanied by relatively low growth rates in the economy, which is exactly what occurred in Brazil. This is consistent with the view that a major constraint on the Brazilian economy over the last three or four decades has been some sluggishness in the evolution of the supply of highly educated workers. 
The Chilean case tells a very different story (see figure 3). As the demand for skills has grown rapidly in Chile, the relative supply of highly educated workers has also shot up. As a result, the wage of university-educated workers relative to that of secondary-educated workers has changed little over the past four decades. In Chile a strong surge in supply—whether in response to the demand for skills or as an 
GLOBAL RETURNS TO HIGHER EDUCATION | 33 
FIGURE 2 Relative Supply and Relative Wages of University Graduates in Urban Brazil, 1982–98 
1006040200 
Source: De Ferranti and others (2003). 
1006040200 
Urban Brazil 200 
180160 
140 
0 01120 
Relative wages 
1 89180 
Relative supply 
1982 
1984 
1986 
1988 
1990 
1992 
1994 
1996 
1998 Year of survey 
FIGURE 3 Relative Supply and Relative Wages of University Graduates in Chile, 1966–98 
Source: De Ferranti and others (2003). 
Chile200180160 
140 
0 01120 
80 
Relative wages 
1966 
Relative supply 
7 6911970 
1974 
1978 
1982 
1986 
1990 
1994 
1998 Year of survey 
34 | FRANÇOIS BOURGUIGNON AND F. HALSEY ROGERS 
autonomous increase in supply—prevented a big increase in relative wages from taking place and may have permitted faster growth.4 
What do we learn from the Brazilian and Chilean cases? First, although the global tendency has been for relative tertiary returns to increase over the past two decades, the country-specific trends are just that—very country specific. Flat or even declining premiums in a particular country do not necessarily signify that the demand-side drivers of higher returns are not operating in that country. A second point—a corollary of the first—is that the drivers of returns vary across countries, but that the supply side of the higher education market is an important determinant of returns. 
Policy Issues 
Given this brief analysis, how can policy makers in developing countries best respond to rising returns to tertiary education? Because of the country specificity of both diagnosis and prognosis, and the paucity of evidence on the drivers of returns in particular developing countries, we cannot lay out a concrete set of policy prescriptions. Instead, we identify several issues for governments to consider as they respond. 
If we accept the hypothesis of global skill-biased technical change, then the appropriate response to increases in returns to higher education is to focus on the supply side. The policy objective of increasing the supply of skills would not be to drive down the returns to tertiary education.5 Instead, governments should aim to respond appropriately to the forces for higher productivity and growth that lie behind this rising college premium. From an economic perspective, rising returns mean that higher education skills are becoming more productive, and so the rational response—the response that improves economic efficiency and accelerates economic growth—is to increase the supply of highly educated people. Doing so entails three steps: investing public resources for tertiary education efficiently; expanding the pipeline of qualified entrants into tertiary schools; and assuring quality of both publicly and privately provided tertiary education. Together, they constitute an agenda for ensuring that the tertiary sector can respond flexibly and efficiently to higher demand for skills. 
Investing Efficiently in Tertiary Education 
If the tertiary education system is functioning well and is able to expand without additional government action, then no further policy response may be necessary. In that case, over time, as the supply of tertiary graduates increases, the differential in earnings will progressively be reduced. By contrast, if the tertiary education sector is unable to train enough graduates efficiently, then other responses may be necessary. The most straightforward policy response might be to increase government funding for higher education. A recent analysis by Fortin (2006) shows that within the United States the college wage premium increased most rapidly in the 1990s in those states where public expenditures on higher education were the lowest in the 1980s. This 
GLOBAL RETURNS TO HIGHER EDUCATION | 35 
result supports the view that government funding for higher education is indeed both an important determinant of wage premiums and a way to take advantage of the productivity gains that lie behind rising premiums. Other OECD examples in table 1 are also suggestive of the role played by government spending in increasing supply. Austria and Sweden, which saw decreasing returns in either the 1980s or 1990s, were two of the three European Union (EU) countries with the highest public spending per student on tertiary education in 1997. According to de la Fuente and Jimeno (2005), Austria spent 42 percent of GDP per capita for each tertiary student, and Sweden spent 58 percent, compared with the EU average of 34 percent. In the case of Norway, too, Hoegeland, Klette, and Salvanes (1999) credit a “remarkable expansion of the Norwegian educational system” with having kept the college wage premium from rising in the face of growing demand for skills in the 1980s. 
These OECD results are suggestive. To design policy for developing countries, however, will require not only carrying out comparable assessments for those countries but also, crucially, identifying the most efficient ways of spending government money. Developing and transition nations face much tighter resource constraints than OECD countries and so can ill afford to waste resources in an attempt to meet the growing demand for skills. Using these resources efficiently will require answering several sets of questions: 
● One key issue is the selection challenge. How can we ensure that, in subsidizing the higher education system, we are attracting the most talented students from all strata of society, not just students who have gone through some kind of social screening process? Efficient use of public resources requires spending them on the right students. 
● A second issue is internal efficiency. How do we provide education to any given set of students as efficiently as possible? In answering this question, it is not only the relative wage premium for tertiary graduates (relative to secondary graduates, that is) that matters. Once we begin to discuss the use of public funds, the issue of absolute returns to public spending becomes important. We have to take into account such issues as the public costs of education, the size of any externalities, and the likelihood of brain drain of highly skilled workers. We have to look at the production function for education and eliminate any inefficiencies. 
● The third issue is the structure of financing. What is the optimal combination of tuition fees, scholarships, and loans? The answer depends, in part, on how much the social returns to tertiary education differs from the private returns for the student. But it also depends on such factors as the risk tolerance of students from low-income families. Even if expected private returns are high, the student may not be willing to bear the risk of borrowing for his education, and society may have an interest in subsidizing his enrollment for distributional reasons. 
These are just a few examples of the efficiency considerations that must be taken into account when governments respond to the signal of rising returns by subsidizing tertiary education. 
36 | FRANÇOIS BOURGUIGNON AND F. HALSEY ROGERS 
Expanding the Pipeline of Students 
In the case of lowand middle-income countries, thinking about higher education policies should lead us inevitably back to the secondary education system. Without an increase in access to and quality of the secondary schools that produce candidates for tertiary schools, it will not be possible to take full advantage of the productivity gains signaled by the higher college wage premium. 
This policy thrust may initially have results that seem counterproductive. If we start by investing more in secondary education, the university wage premium is likely to increase initially, simply because the supply of workers with secondary education will increase relative to the supply of those with a university education. Only in the second stage, when more of those secondary school graduates attain a university degree (and assuming again that access to tertiary education is meritocratic), will it be possible to exploit the productivity differential signaled by higher college premiums. To borrow an analogy from international trade, we might expect this policy to lead to an inverse J-curve in the university wage premium—an increase over the first few years, but then a decrease over the longer run. 
Ensuring Quality 
A final important issue concerns the regulation of tertiary education. In some countries where we have observed a large increase in the returns to higher education, we have seen a simultaneous increase in the number of private providers of higher education. Those providers have done well financially, in the sense that they have created profitable businesses. And under the right conditions, growth of the private sector may be an effective way of meeting the increased demand for skills, so opening up opportunities for that growth is an important policy response. 
But liberalization of the sector must go hand in hand with effective regulation. Too often, graduates of these new tertiary institutions earn less than the graduates of more established universities do. This gap may simply reflect the lower quality of the students matriculating at the new private universities, but it may also reflect poor educational quality. If prospective students have poor information about the quality of the education or if the state provides significant financing for these private schools, then there will be good arguments for having a government role in ensuring quality or certifying higher education institutions. Note that the response is not likely to be for the state to reassert its former role as the sole provider of tertiary education, but instead for it to take on more effectively its new role as regulator of the sector. This step may be necessary to increase the likelihood that scarce resources for tertiary education are being well used.6 
A Caveat: Coping with Brain Drain 
Our discussion has implicitly assumed that the market for skills is closed. That is, we have assumed that, while the sources of increased demand could be international—for example, if greater import competition in product markets increases the efficiency of domestic firms—the domestic supply of and demand for skills are what determine the 
GLOBAL RETURNS TO HIGHER EDUCATION | 37 
equilibrium wage for skilled labor. But international migration could also contribute to the rising college wage premium in middle-income countries. If there is growing international mobility of highly skilled labor, then the returns to higher education within a particular country will reflect that mobility. If skilled workers in China or India can more easily get higher-paying jobs in the United States or Europe, for example, then those workers will need to be offered comparably high wages at home to persuade them not to emigrate. In that case, rising relative returns in developing countries (though not in developed countries) could be explained by a supply effect—with the brain drain, the supply of skilled labor has shifted up and is horizontal at the international wage for skilled labor. 
In this case, assessing policy options is more complicated. The supply side may respond by increasing the number of skilled workers, but if the sending country is small relative to world supply and demand, then this supply response will have no effect on the wage differential. If we accept theories of the type presented in this volume by Frédéric Docquier, then it is possible that this “brain circulation” might even have some elements favorable for growth. But given the complexity of analyzing this situation, the welfare implications will be even more ambiguous than in the case of a closed labor market. This example underlines the need for careful country-specific analysis of the drivers of college premiums and the extent of the supply response. 
Conclusions 
The race between education and technology—to borrow the title of Goldin and Katz’s (2007) analysis of U.S. education wage premiums—is a race that developingcountry education systems can ill afford to lose. The processes generating changes in the returns to higher education are complex, but it is essential that we understand and respond to them. If the broad trend toward increasing earnings differentials between highly educated people and other workers is allowed to continue unabated, income and social inequalities will deepen, translating inevitably into greater inequality of opportunities for children of the current generation of workers. It is crucial that we take steps to avoid creating these fundamental inequalities in countries that are enjoying rapid growth. With the right combination of policies to expand access to tertiary education efficiently and meritocratically, we have the opportunity to increase growth while at the same time improving equity. 
Notes 
1. This formulation too would miss some nuances. For example, assuming implicitly that each year of education at a given level has the same labor market returns assumes away any “sheepskin effects” that give a larger return for completing the final year of education at any level (see, for example, Jaeger and Page 1996). 2. An earlier paper by Edin and Holmlund (1995) finds a slight increase in relative returns to university education in the middle to late 1980s, but concurs in finding a sharp decline through the early 1980s. 
38 | FRANÇOIS BOURGUIGNON AND F. HALSEY ROGERS 
3. In the Indonesian case, making the extreme assumption that the rate of return to private education is at most double that of public education, a 10 percentage point increase in the share of the private sector would at most cause a 4 percentage point increase in the average rate of return instead of the ZQ points actually observed. 4. Figure 3 is not obviously consistent with the view that growing international mobility of labor has helped to drive the increase in returns to highly skilled workers. Careful analysis of this hypothesis would require further evidence, however. 5. Indeed, this may be impossible, to the extent that the returns are governed by the international price of skilled labor; see below for a brief discussion of the effects of migration. 6. For a discussion of quality assurance and other government roles in the tertiary sector, see 
World Bank (2002, chap. 4). 
References 
Alatas, Vivi, and François Bourguignon. 2005. “The Evolution of Income Distribution during Indonesia’s Fast Growth, 1980–96.” In The Microeconomics of Income Distribution Dynamics in East Asia and Latin America, ed. François Bourguignon, Francisco H. G. Ferreira, and Nora Lustig. Washington, DC: World Bank. Arabsheibani, G. Reza, Francisco Galrao Carneiro, and Andrew Henley. 2006. “Changes in Human Capital and Earnings Inequality: Recent Evidence from Brazil.” Journal of Development Studies 42 (5): 837–67. Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2005. “Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality: Re-Assessing the Revisionists.” NBER Working Paper 11627, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Baumol, William J. 1967. “Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy of Urban 
Crisis.” American Economic Review 57 (3): 415–26. Blom, Andreas, and Thomas Hansen. 2002. Economic Perspectives of Tertiary Education: The 
Case of Colombia. LCSHD Paper Series 75. Washington, DC: World Bank. Borland, Jeff, Peter Dawkins, David Johnson, and Ross Williams. 2000. “Returns to Investment in Higher Education.” Melbourne Economics of Higher Education Research Program Report No. 1, University of Melbourne. Bourguignon, François, Martin Fournier, and Marc Gurgand. 2005. “Distribution, Development, and Education in Taiwan, 1979–94.” In The Microeconomics of Income Distribution Dynamics in East Asia and Latin America, ed. François Bourguignon, Francisco H. G. Ferreira, and Nora Lustig. Washington, DC: World Bank. Brunello, Giorgio, Simona Comi, and Claudio Lucifora. 2000. “The College Wage Gap in 10 European Countries: Evidence from Two Cohorts.” Working Paper 85.2000, Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei, Milan. Card, David, and John E. DiNardo. 2002. “Skill-Biased Technological Change and Rising Wage Inequality: Some Problems and Puzzles.” Journal of Labor Economics 20 (4): 733–83. Cardoso, Ana Rute. 2004. “Jobs for Young University Graduates: Is It Worth Having a 
Degree?” IZA Discussion Paper 1311. Chase, Robert S. 1998. “Markets for Communist Human Capital: Returns to Education and Experience in the Czech Republic and Slovakia.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 51 (3): 401–23. de Ferranti, David, Guillermo E. Perry, Indermit Gill, J. Luis Guasch, William F. Maloney, Carolina Sanchez-Paramo, and Norbert Schady. 2003. Closing the Gap in Education and Technology. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
GLOBAL RETURNS TO HIGHER EDUCATION | 39 
de la Fuente, Angel, and Juan Francisco Jimeno. 2005. “The Private and Fiscal Returns to Schooling and the Effect of Public Policies on Private Incentives to Invest in Education: A General Framework and Some Results for the EU.” CESifo Working Paper 1392, CESifo GmbH, Munich. Edin, Per-Anders, and Bertl Holmlund. 1995. “The Swedish Wage Structure: The Rise and Fall of Wage Policy?” In Differences and Changes in Wage Structures, ed. Richard Barry Freeman and Lawrence F. Katz. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Fersterer, Josef, and Rudolf Winter-Ebmer. 2003. “Are Austrian Returns to Education Falling 
over Time?” Labour Economics 10 (1): 73–89. Fortin, Nicole M. 2006. “Higher-Education Policies and the College Wage Premium: Cross
State Evidence from the 1990s.” American Economic Review 96 (4): 959–87. Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. “The Race between Education and Technology: The Evolution of U.S. Educational Wage Differentials, 1890 to 2005.” NBER Working Paper 12984, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, and Klara Sabirianova Peter. 2005. “Returns to Schooling in Russia and Ukraine: A Semiparametric Approach to Cross-Country Comparative Analysis.” Journal of Comparative Economics 33 (2): 324–50. Gustavsson, Magnus. 2004. “Changes in Educational Wage Premiums in Sweden: 
1992–2001.” Department of Economics, Uppsala University. Hoegeland, Torbjorn, Tor Jakob Klette, and Kjell G. Salvanes. 1999. “Declining Returns to Education in Norway? Comparing Estimates across Cohorts, Sectors, and over Time.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 101 (4): 555–76. Jaeger, David A., and Marianne E. Page. 1996. “Degrees Matter: New Evidence on Sheepskin Effects in the Returns to Education.” Review of Economics and Statistics 78 (4): 733–40. Karkkainnen, Kura. 2006. “Emergence of Private Higher Education Funding within the 
OECD Area.” OECD, Center for Educational Research and Innovation, Paris. Legovini, Arianna, César Bouillón, and Nora Lustig. 2005. “Can Education Explain Changes in Income Inequality in Mexico?” In The Microeconomics of Income Distribution Dynamics in East Asia and Latin America, ed. François Bourguignon, Francisco H. G. Ferreira, and Nora Lustig. Washington, DC: World Bank. Li, Haizheng. 2003. “Economic Transition and Returns to Education in China.” Economics 
of Education Review 22 (3): 17–28. López-Acevedo, Gladys. 2001. “Evolution of Earnings and Rates of Returns to Education in Mexico.” Policy Research Working Paper 2691, World Bank, Poverty and Economic Management Unit, Washington, DC. Machin, Stephen, and Sandra McNally. 2007. “Tertiary Education Systems and Labour Markets.” Paper commissioned for the OECD, Thematic Review of Tertiary Education, January. Maglen, Leo. 1994. “Education Expansion and the Private Returns to a University Degree.” 
Economic Papers 13: 57–71. Munich, Daniel, Jan Svejnar, and Katherine Terrell. 2005. “Returns to Human Capital under the Communist Wage Grid and during the Transition to a Market Economy.” Review of Economics and Statistics 87 (1): 100–23. Palme, Marten O., and Robert E. Wright. 1998. “Changes in the Rate of Return to Education 
in Sweden: 1968–1991.” Applied Economics 30 (12): 1653–63. Patrinos, Harry Anthony, and Chris N. Sakellariou. 2004. “Economic Volatility and Returns 
to Education in Venezuela: 1992–2002.” Applied Economics 38 (17): 1991–2005. Tsakloglou, Panos, and Ioannis Cholezas. 2005. “Education and Inequality in Greece.” IZA 
Discussion Paper No. 1582. 
40 | FRANÇOIS BOURGUIGNON AND F. HALSEY ROGERS 
Vélez, Carlos Eduardo, José Leibovich, Adriana Kugler, César Bouillón, and Jairo Núñez. 2005. “The Reversal of Inequality Trends in Colombia, 1978–95: A Combination of Persistent and Fluctuating Forces.” In The Microeconomics of Income Distribution Dynamics in East Asia and Latin America, ed. François Bourguignon, Francisco H. G. Ferreira, and Nora Lustig. Washington, DC: World Bank. Vere, James P. 2005. “Education, Development, and Wage Inequality: The Case of Taiwan.” 
Economic Development and Cultural Change 53 (3): 711–35. World Bank. 2000. Higher Education in Developing Countries: Peril and Promise. Washington, 
DC: World Bank. 
. 2002. Constructing Knowledge Societies: New Challenges for Tertiary Education. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
In the past 40 years, East Asia has had among the most dynamic economies in the world, developing more rapidly and more consistently than any other region. In the early 1990s, the World Bank called it “the East Asian Success Story” (World Bank 1993). After suffering a severe economic crisis in the late 1990s, the region recovered quickly and resumed its impressive growth. 
There are many factors and explanations for the success, including policies giving priority to industries with comparative advantages, policies promoting exports, policies supporting a free or a managed market, relatively high saving and investment rates, a strong and purposeful state, and attitudes and work ethics supportive of development. Similarly important, or perhaps more important, the values and cultural traditions of many East Asian countries attach high priority to education, which has helped to develop East Asia’s human resources and enabled scientific and technological inventions to be absorbed and applied relatively easily. Confucianism is only one of the cultural traditions in the region that emphasize education in the development process. The ancient classics include sayings such as “To develop a nationstate, education should come first” and “A man without education cannot be a moral and knowledgeable man” (Min 2004). These long-standing values and beliefs have placed ever-increasing demands on education and had a significant impact on development. Confucianism has exerted an influence not only in China, Taiwan District, and Hong Kong District, but also in Japan, the Republic of Korea, and Singapore. Many studies have analyzed the strong relationship between economic development and education in East Asia (Adams 2002). As the World Bank (1991) comments, “One lesson from the past is that the economies—such as Japan and South Korea— which committed themselves to education and training made great strides in both human development and economic development.” 
Weifang Min is executive vice president and chair of the University Council as well as a professor in the economics of education at Peking University. 
Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics 2008, Regional © 2008 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank 
41 
Keynote Address Higher Education Financing in East Asia: Policy Implications for China 
WEIFANG MIN 
42 | WEIFANG MIN 
Along with economic growth and the move from low-technology, labor-intensive production to more technologically sophisticated and higher-value production, East Asian economies experienced a broad expansion in education, starting with primary education and moving through to secondary education and even higher education. Well-educated populations, traditions of scholarship, and a deep respect for learning are part of virtually every East Asian economy. Since the 1990s, higher education has become even more central, forming an essential part of the knowledge economy and competitiveness for the future (Altbach 2004). 
Since financing is a central issue in higher education development, and the financial constraints on higher education are becoming greater in China as well as worldwide, this presentation seeks to analyze the financing of higher education in East Asia and to draw some policy implications for China. The rest of the paper is divided into two parts: the first one analyzes the financing of higher education in the East Asian region in general, while the second discusses what China might borrow from other East Asian economies. 
The Financing of Higher Education in East Asia 
East Asia is a highly diversified region, including the highly developed economy of Japan; the newly industrialized economies such as Korea, Taiwan District, Hong Kong District, and Singapore, followed by Malaysia and Thailand; developing economies such as the Philippines and Indonesia; and transitional economies such as China, Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia. Different countries have different historical influences. To a certain extent, Korea, Taiwan District, and Indonesia were influenced by Japan, either from colonial times or through trade relations. Hong Kong, Singapore, and Malaysia were influenced by the United Kingdom from the colonial period. The Philippines and some other East Asian economies were influenced by the United States either through the colonial period or through the American presence in the region following World War II. China, Vietnam, and Laos were influenced by the previous Soviet model in the period of a centrally planned economy. Cultural traditions in East Asia are also diversified. Some countries are more or less influenced by Confucian thinking, some countries have an Islamic cultural tradition, and still others have Western religious influences such as Catholicism or Christianity. 
Because of the diverse cultures, historical heritage, social systems, and levels of economic development, it is difficult to identify a uniform model for financing higher education that is suitable for all East Asian economies. Nevertheless, compared with some other regions in the world, East Asian economies, such as Japan, Korea, Taiwan District, the Philippines, and Indonesia, share some common patterns, as shown in table 1. In these countries, the proportion of students enrolled in higher education in the private sector is much larger, while the government expenditure on higher education is much lower, than in the European and North American countries. 
Even if government allocations for higher education are low in some East Asian economies, total expenditures on and enrollment in higher education are quite high, because individual families spend more on their children’s education (see table 2). 
HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCING IN EAST ASIA | 43 
TABLE 1. Higher Education Enrollment and Finance, by Region 
Enrollment Financing patterns 
Region Public Private Government Families 
Europe 100 percent Few High Low North America 70 percent 30 percent High High East Asiaa 20 percent 80 percent Low High 
Source: Kaneko (2006); OECD (2005). 
a. For East Asia, the OECD data set only has data for Japan and Korea. Data for Taiwan District are also available. 
TABLE 2. Total Higher Education Expenditure as a Percent of GDP, by Region, 2001 
Governmental Nongovernmental Regions expenditure expenditure Totala 
North America Canada 1.5 1.0 2.5 United States 0.9 1.8 2.7 
Europe United Kingdom 0.8 0.3 1.1 France 1.0 0.1 1.1 Germany 1.0 0.1 1.1 
East Asia Japan 0.5 0.6 1.1 Korea, Rep. of 0.4 2.3 2.7 
Source: OECD (2004). 
a. Expenditures per student include research expenditures. 
The government allocations for higher education are higher in Hong Kong District, Singapore, and Malaysia than in other East Asian economies, probably due to the colonial influence of the United Kingdom. The willingness of families to share the costs of higher education by paying tuition and fees is quite strong. This might be due to the belief that higher education is one of the best ways to achieve upward social mobility, especially intergenerational social mobility in which the family benefits by improving the economic and social status of the children. 
Cost sharing in many East Asian economies takes the form of enrollment in private institutions (Altbach 1999; Umakoshi 2004). Private education has thrived because the public sector has been unable to meet the demand. Although national universities in Japan, Korea, the Philippines, and some other East Asian economies have served as the core of the higher education system, the market-oriented private sector has led the expansion of enrollment in East Asia (Umakoshi 2004). In Korea in 2004, the government only spent about 0.4 percent of GDP on higher education (compared with 1.5 percent in Canada, 0.9 percent in the United States, and about 1.0 percent in European countries), but the gross enrollment rate was above 80 percent (see figure 1). In China private institutions grew quite rapidly after the country 
44 | WEIFANG MIN 
FIGURE 1 Private Education’s Share of Total Enrollment in Higher Education Institutions in Select East Asian Economies 
South Korea 
Japan 
Philippines y rtnuoC80.6 
77 
66.4 
Indonesia 
65.2 
Taiwan District 
61.5 
Malaysia 
30 
China 
10 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 
80Percentage 
Source: Author’s calculations, based on data synthesized from the web sites of World Bank, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, UNESCO, and OECD, 2000–06. 
shifted from a centrally planned economy to a dynamic market economy and officially adopted the law to promote min-ban (private) education in December 2002 (National People’s Congress of China 2002). 
When East Asian economies are divided into four groups by income level, the level of government spending for education in every case is lower than the world average, even for the high-income economies, indicating that individual families bear the bulk of higher education costs, as shown in figure 2. The upper-middle-income group in the region only has one economy—Malaysia—with a high level of public spending on education. 
In looking at three major indicators of public finance for higher education (public expenditure as a percentage of GDP, enrollment rate, and proportion of students in the private sector), the rates of China are significantly lower than those of Japan, Korea, or the Philippines, as demonstrated in figure 3. 
Although China’s total spending on education as a percentage of GDP is lower than both the world and regional averages, its spending on higher education as a percentage of GDP (0.6 percent in 2005) is relatively higher than that of some other East Asian economies, such as Japan (0.5 percent in 2004) and Korea (0.4 percent in 2004). China spends a relatively larger share on higher education than Japan, Korea, and the Philippines, especially since 1999, when the Chinese government decided to spend more on higher education, as shown in figure 4. 
The trends in public expenditure per student on higher education as a percent of GDP per capita show that China spends a much higher share per student than the other three East Asian economies. This indicates that (a) China’s GDP per capita is lower than that of the other three economies, and that (b) China’s use of resources is relatively inefficient because of the legacy of the centrally planned system, and the fact that current reforms are still under way. However, spending per student declined 
90 
FIGURE 2 Higher Education Finance in East Asia, by Level of Income 
100 
908070 
t necrePSource: Author’s calculations based on data synthesized from the web sites of the World Bank, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, UNESCO, and OECD, 2000–06. 
908070 
t necreP605040 3020100High income country 605040 3020100Upper middle 
Lower middle 
Low income 
China income country 
income country 
country 
Public expenditure on education as % of GDP Public expenditure on education as % of total government expenditure Public educational expenditure in tertiary as % of total educational expenditure Tertiary public educational expenditure per pupil as a percentage of GDP per capita 
FIGURE 3 Higher Education Finance in Select East Asian Countries 
100 
Japan Korea Philippines China 
Public expenditure on education as % of GDP Public expenditure on education as % of total government expenditure Public educational expenditure in tertiary as % of total educational expenditure Tertiary public educational expenditure per pupil as a percentage of GDP per capita Enrollment rate in tertiary education Tertiary education enrollment in private college as % of total enrollment 
Source: Author’s calculations based on data synthesized from the web sites of the World Bank, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, UNESCO, and OECD, 2000–06. 
45 
46 | WEIFANG MIN 
FIGURE 4 Higher Education Expenditure as a Percent of Total Education Spending in Select East Asian Countries, 1998–2004 
3025 
China 20 egatnecreP15Source: Author’s calculations based on data synthesized from the web sites of the World Bank, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, UNESCO, and OECD, 2000–06. 
FIGURE 5 Public Expenditure per Student on Higher Education as a Percent of GDP per Capita in Select East Asian Countries, 1998–2004 
Source: Author’s calculations based on data synthesized from the web sites of the World Bank, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, UNESCO, and OECD, 2000–06. 
Japan 
Philippines 
10Korea 
501998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 
120 
100 
80 egatnecreP60China 4020 
Japan 
Philippines Korea 01998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 
HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCING IN EAST ASIA | 47 
sharply beginning in 1999, when the dramatic expansion of Chinese higher education took place. This probably occurred as a result of (a) improvements in the efficiency of resource use as the educational reforms deepened and enrollment expanded and (b) the increase in China’s GDP per capita, which lowered expenditure per student as a share of GDP, as shown in figure 5. 
In short, financing in East Asia has many unique features. As one part of East Asia, China shares common traditions and features with other East Asian economies. However, China is still transitioning from a centrally planned to a market economy. What experiences and lessons should China borrow from other East Asian economies in financing higher education? This is the subject of the following section. 
What China Might Borrow from Other East Asian Economies in Financing Higher Education 
Similar to some of the other East Asian economies, along with rapid economic growth, the massive expansion of education in China moved quickly from primary to secondary and then to higher education, especially since the late 1990s. However, since China is a transitional economy, to understand current economic and social development in relation to higher education reform and development, one has to understand the economic transition that China is experiencing. All of the major changes in Chinese higher education, including curriculum and teaching, governance, and financing, are closely related to economic reform and development. On the one hand, the economic transition is creating demand for well-educated manpower and raising the level of individual income, which, in turn, is creating more demand for higher education. On the other hand, universities and colleges are producing highlevel, well-educated, specialized human resources, generating the knowledge urgently needed by the new economy, and preparing people to participate in the economic and social changes. Universities thus have a vital role to play in the country’s social and economic transition and development. China’s economic transition is relatively successful, averaging annual GDP growth rates above 9 percent for the past 28 years, as shown in figure 6. 
According to Wang Mengkui of the Development Research Center of the State Council of China (Wang 2006) and some Peking University economists such as Wen Hai (Wen 2006), the Chinese economy will continue to grow relatively quickly for the next 20 years. By 2010, the estimated GDP of China will be close to Y 30 trillion. First, China will continue to have a competitive advantage because of its large supply of low-cost labor. Currently, about 60 percent of labor is still in the rural areas. Along with the modernization of agriculture and increased agricultural productivity, the proportion of labor in farming will be reduced to 20 percent or below, which means that, in the next 20 years, 500 million people will be liberated from farming the land. They will join the labor force in the manufacturing and service sectors. Second, China potentially has a huge domestic market, and the purchasing power of its population of 1.3 billion people will keep the economy growing. Foreign 
48 | WEIFANG MIN 
FIGURE 6 GDP in China, 1978–2005 100 million yuan 
200,000 
183,085 
150,000 
n auyn oillim0 01100,000 
99,215 
60,794 
50,000 
0 
1978197919801981198219831984198519861987198819891990199119921993199419951996199719981999200020012002200320042005 
Source: State Statistics Bureau of China (various years). 
trade and investment are driving China’s current economic growth, but development of the domestic market will constitute an even more powerful force. Third, the reform will deepen during the next 20 years, and the structural and systemic changes will further liberate China’s productive forces and raise productivity. At present, the reform of property rights has not been completed, which results in a significant loss of productivity. The potential for growth as a result of property reform is huge. Fourth, the external environment for China’s growth is relatively good. Entering the World Trade Organization (WTO) allows China to make better use of the global market and global resources through mutually beneficial arrangements for economic development. 
Rapid economic development and deepened reform have dramatically changed how human resources are mobilized, allocated, and used in China, which, in turn, has had a significant impact on the human resource model and operational mechanism for China’s higher education system (Min 2002). Driven by the human resource needs of the labor market and higher family income, demand for higher education is soaring, leading to a rapid expansion in enrollment. Table 3 shows the annual admissions of new students, while figure 7 shows the total enrollment of regular, fulltime students in higher education. 
However, although the government has raised the level of spending on higher education, as shown in figure 8, the increase in state appropriations has not kept pace with the expansion in enrollment, resulting in increasing financial constraints for universities and colleges. As shown in table 4, government funding per student has been declining in recent years, both in total allocations per student and in nonsalary allocations for teaching and learning materials per student. The total allocation per 
HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCING IN EAST ASIA | 49 
TABLE 3. Number of Annual Admissions of New Students to Higher Education Institutions in China, 1998–2006 
Year Annual new intakes 
1998 1,000,000 1999 1,600,000 2000 2,200,000 2001 2,680,000 2002 3,200,000 2003 3,820,000 2004 4,300,000 2005 5,080,000 2006 5,400,000 
Source: Ministry of Education, PRC (various years, 1998–2006). 
FIGURE 7 Regular Full-time Enrollment in Higher Education in China, 1978–2005 numbers (10,000) 
2,000 
1,561.78 1,500 ) 000,01(s rebmuN1,000 
556.09 500 
0 
1978198019851986 
198719881989 
199019911992 
1993199419951996199719981999200020012002200320042005 
Source: State Statistics Bureau of China (various years). 
student decreased from Y 6,178 in 2002 to Y 5,552 in 2004. It further decreased to Y 5,376 in 2005 (Chen 2007). 
Other indicators of quality have also been declining, such as student-teacher ratios, classroom space per student, laboratory space per student, library space and books per student, and living facilities per student. On the one hand, the current financial situation of Chinese higher education institutions is very tight; on the other 
50 | WEIFANG MIN 
FIGURE 8 Government Appropriations for Higher Education in China, 1998–2005 100 million yuan 
2,500 
2,000 
n auyn oillim0 011,500 1,000 
0 
1998 
TABLE 4. Budgeted Funding per Student in China, 2002–04 yuan 
Year 2002 2003 2004 
Total funding per student 6,178 5,773 5,552 Nonsalary funding per student 2,453 2,352 2,298 
Source: Ministry of Education, PRC (2005). 
2,000 
1,683 
1,447 
1,145 
904 
704 545 500 
1999 
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
Source: Ministry of Education, PRC (various years, 1998–2005). 
hand, the social demands for higher education are strong and growing, as shown in table 5. These estimates were conducted in 2004. By 2006, total enrollment in higher education had already reached 25 million students, and it is expected to reach 30 million by 2010. Thus a systematic approach to improving higher education finance has to be developed. 
Possible Strategies to Tackle the Financial Constraints in Higher Education 
China has been learning from the experiences of other East Asian economies with regard to economic development and has much to learn about the financing of higher education as well. 
One approach is to raise total state spending on education to the average level of East Asian economies. Recently, a national policy decision has been made to increase 
HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCING IN EAST ASIA | 51 
TABLE 5. Estimated Enrollment in Higher Education in China, 2010 and 2020 enrollment in millions; rate in percent 
2010 2020 
Estimated growth in enrollment Number Enrollment Number Enrollment from base year (2004) enrolled rate enrolled rate 
Low (3 percent) 23.88 20.6 32.09 38.3 Middle (5 percent) 26.80 23.1 43.66 52.1 High (8 percent) 31.74 27.4 68.52 81.8 Very high (10 percent) 35.43 30.6 91.90 109.7 
Source: Zhang (2005). 
Note: The population between the ages of 18 to 22 is estimated to be 115.82 million for 2010 and 83.75 million for 2020. 
government allocation to education from less than 3 percent to 4 percent of GDP by 2010. Considering the rapid growth of GDP, the current government allocation to education will almost double. 
China’s system of higher education still has many inefficiencies and great opportunities to improve the use and allocation of resources. This could be achieved by giving universities and colleges more autonomy in financial management. Universities and colleges could improve their financial situation by improving the efficiency and effectiveness of resource use and cutting costs. During the centrally planned period, universities and colleges were totally reliant on state appropriations and were not allowed to mobilize resources from other sources. Now that the economic transition is well under way, wealth is being accumulated in different sectors of society, and it is possible to obtain funding from sources other than the government. Better resource mobilization strategies and more autonomy would help institutions to generate revenue by themselves. This could be done by providing training and other paid services for industries, obtaining commissioned research contracts, and pursuing fundraising activities. Recently, public universities and colleges were allowed to set up foundations to mobilize financial support from private donations, and this has constituted a major breakthrough. 
Encouraging private universities and colleges to develop a dual financial system and allowing both public and private higher education are showing promise. Given the huge unmet demand and considering that the Chinese people attach high priority to the pursuit of higher education opportunities, this is a must. Some policy actions have already been taken. In 1993 the State Education Commission of China issued a document allowing the creation of min-ban (private) higher education institutions (State Education Commission of China 1993). In 2002 the National People’s Congress of China adopted a law to promote private higher education (National People’s Congress of China 2002). 
The unmet demand for higher education is still growing, the capacity of the public sector is limited, and the population is increasingly able to pay a portion of the cost of higher education; thus the expansion of private higher education is feasible. According to some social survey results, the first purpose of Y 16 trillion 
52 | WEIFANG MIN 
of individual family savings is for children’s education (State Statistics Bureau of China 2006). Moreover, the gross enrollment rate in higher education is only 22 percent, leaving 78 percent of China’s college-age population not attending college. As shown in figure 1, the private sector’s share of higher education is still very small in China compared with some other East Asian economies, as Umakoshi (2004) correctly points out: “The private sectors in Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, and the Philippines accommodate over three-quarters of the higher education population, which is unusual in any other area of the world.” Along with development of the new market economy, China should develop a more comprehensive policy framework and a more solid legal infrastructure for the development and regulation of private universities and colleges, as other East Asian economies have done. 
Cost sharing in higher education has been widely practiced in East Asian eco nomies as well as in other parts of the world (Johnstone 2004, 2006; López-Segrera, Sanyal, and Tres 2006), such as in the United States. Following the lead of other East Asia economies, in 1989 China started to charge tuition and fees in universities and colleges and to offer financial aid for students from needy families. The government has regulated universities and colleges to keep an appropriate level of tuition. At the same time, various types of financial aid for students from needy families, such as scholarships, grants-in-aid, government-subsidized student loans, and work-study programs, have been implemented. As individual incomes grow, China should consider formulating and implementing cost-sharing policies: the beneficiaries of higher education who are able to pay should shoulder a reasonable proportion of the costs based on a unit cost analysis. 
Finally, China needs to tackle equity issues in financing higher education. Equity has been a major issue in East Asia as well as in other parts of the world. Along with the social changes and rapid economic growth in the transitional process, some serious equity issues are evident in China, including inequality of income distribution and regional disparities. These problems are also reflected in the higher education sector. Figure 9 shows that China has more serious problems of educational inequality than some other East Asian economies, such as Japan and Korea, as indicated by Gini coefficients. 
Further analysis of access to higher education by income group shows that children from higher-income families tend to enroll in more prestigious universities and to receive higher-quality education and better professional opportunities, as shown in figure 10. Although students from families with lower socioeconomic backgrounds have more access to education than before, the students from families with higher socioeconomic status are better able to attend higher-quality, prestigious universities because they generally score higher on national college entrance examinations. Bettereducated parents with higher family incomes are better able to develop their children’s scholastic aptitude and ability by providing better advice and additional assistance regarding their children’s education. 
Empirical analysis of income inequality of different social groups by education level shows that the lower the level of educational attainment, the higher the level of 
HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCING IN EAST ASIA | 53 
FIGURE 9 Education Gini Coefficient in Select Countries, 1960–2000 
0.6 
0.5 
0.3 
0.20 
Source: Thomas, Wang, and Fan (2001). 
80 6040200Korea 0.4 
China 
Japan 
USA 0.1 
1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 
FIGURE 10 Student Enrollment in Different Types of Higher Education Institutions in China, by Family Background 
100 
90 
s tnedutsf oe gatnecreP70503010Low income Lower-middle Middle 
Income quintiles 
Source: Li (2006). 
Higher-middle High income 
Low quality universities Middle quality universities 
Elite universities 
54 | WEIFANG MIN 
FIGURE 11 Gini Coefficients in China, by Level of Education 
0.500 
0.400 
0.300 
0.2000 
income inequality, as shown in figure 11. Education could play an important role in improving social equity by improving income distribution. 
It has been argued that a harmonious society has to be a more equitable society and that equity in education is the foundation of social equity. Higher education could play an important role in promoting intergenerational upward social mobility for low-income social groups (Guo and Min 2006, 2007). Thus, to tackle the issue of equity, the government significantly increased the amount of financial aid available to students from low-income families, from less than Y 10 billion in 2006 to Y 30.8 billion in 2008. A new student financial aid program will be implemented within three years, and the total amount available for helping students from lowincome families will exceed Y 50 billion (Zhao 2007). 
Another major equity issue in Chinese higher education is the striking regional disparities. The level of economic development between the east coast region and the inland, especially the western region has been widening in the past 28 years, leading to significant disparities in the financing of higher education, as shown in table 6. 
The new policy direction of the Chinese state is to achieve more even development of the country, construct a harmonious society, and eliminate regional disparities in education. To further these ends, China should borrow from the experience of some other East Asian economies and increase intergovernmental transfers, meaning more educational appropriations from the central government to the poor provinces. This has begun, and China has set up special financial aid programs for students from low-income families in the underdeveloped regions. In addition, China requires universities from the better-developed regions to partner with universities in the underdeveloped areas to provide educational support. 
0.415 
0.388 
0.384 
0.372 
0.346 
0.341 
0.291 
0.100 
Primary 
Junior 
Senior 
Technical 
Junior 
Under
Graduate high 
high 
secondary 
college 
graduate 
Source: Household survey conducted by State Statistics Bureau of China and Peking University, 2006. 
HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCING IN EAST ASIA | 55 
TABLE 6. Budgeted Funding per Student in China, by Region, in 2004 yuan 
Region Total Nonsalary 
Shanghai 9,116 4,490 Tianjin 9,022 3,886 Guangdong 8,581 3,573 Hubei 2,459 841 Hunan 2,581 857 Sichuan 1,946 870 
Source: Ministry of Education, PRC (various years, 2005). 
In short, China shares many traditions and features with some of the other East Asian economies. China is seeking to learn from the experiences and lessons of some and to avoid the problems of others. China is paying attention to the “East Asian Success Story.” 
References 
Adams, Don. 2002. Education and National Development: Priorities, Policies, and Planning; Education in Developing Asia. Vol. 1. Hong Kong: Asian Development Bank and the Comparative Education Research Center, University of Hong Kong. Altbach, Philip. 2004. “The Past and Future of Asian Universities: Twenty-First Century Challenges.” In Asian Universities: Historical Perspectives and Contemporary Challenges, ed. Philip Altbach and Toru Umakoshi. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. Altbach, Philip G., ed. 1999. Private Prometheus: Private Higher Education and Development 
in the 21st Century. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. Chen, Weiguang. 2007. China Higher Education Financing and Management. Beijing: Ministry 
of Education, PRC, Department of Finance. Guo, Congbin, and Weifang Min. 2006. “The Impact of Family Economic and Cultural Capital on Children’s Educational Opportunities.” Journal of Higher Education Research [Wuhan, China] 11 (141): 24–31. ———. 2007. “The Intergenerational Income Mobility of Chinese Urban Residents.” Educa
tion Research [Beijing, China] 5 (328): 3–14. Johnstone, D. Bruce. 2004. “The Economics and Politics of Cost-Sharing in Higher Education: 
Comparative Perspectives.” Economics of Education Review 23 (4): 403–10. ———. 2006. Financing Higher Education: Cost-Sharing in International Perspectives. Boston College, Center for International Higher Education, International Comparative Higher Education Finance and Accessibility Project, and Sense Publishers, the Netherlands. Kaneko, Motohisa. 2006. “Financial Issues in East Asian Model for Higher Education Development.” Paper presented at the China-Japan Joint Conference on Higher Education Finance, September 16–17, Peking University, Beijing. Li, Wenli. 2006. “Family Background, Financial Constraints, and Higher Education Attendance.” Paper presented at the International Conference on the Economics of Education: Major Contributions and Future Directions, Dijon, June 20–23. 
56 | WEIFANG MIN 
López-Segrera, Francisco, Bikas Sanyal, and Joaquim Tres. 2006. “Global Tendencies and Perspectives on Higher Education in Today’s World.” In Higher Education in the World 2006: The Financing of Universities. A Global University Network for Innovation (GUNI) report. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. Min, Weifang. 2002. Research on the Higher Education Operation Mechanism in the Market 
Economy. Beijing: People’s Education Press, June. ———. 2004. “The Legacy of the Past and the Context of the Future.” In Asian Universities: Historical Perspectives and Contemporary Challenges, ed. Philip Altbach and Toru Umakoshi. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. Ministry of Education, PRC (People’s Republic of China. Various years, 1998–2005. China 
Education Finance Statistics Yearbook. Beijing. National People’s Congress of China. 2002. Law for Promoting Min-Ban (Private) Education 
of China. Beijing: National People’s Congress of China. OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2004. Education at a 
Glance: OECD Indicators, 2004. Paris: OECD. ———. 2005. Education at a Glance: OECD Indicators, 2005. Paris: OECD. State Education Commission of China. 1993. Regulations for the Establishment of Min-Ban 
(Private) Higher Education Institutions. Beijing: State Education Commission of China. State Statistics Bureau of China. 2006. China Statistics Year Book 1996. Beijing: State Statistics 
Bureau of China. ———. Various years, 1998–2006. China Education Statistics Yearbook. Beijing: Ministry of 
Education, China. Thomas, V., Y. Wang, and X. Fan. 2001. “Measuring Education Inequality: Gini Coefficients of Education.” Policy Research Working Paper 2525, World Bank, Washington, DC, January. Umakoshi, Toru. 2004. “Private Higher Education in Asia: Traditions and Development.” In Asian Universities: Historical Perspectives and Contemporary Challenges, ed. Philip Altbach and Toru Umakoshi. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. Wang, Mengkui. 2006. The Prospect of the Chinese Economic Development. Beijing: State 
Council of China, Development Research Center. Wen, Hai. 2006. “Prospects of the Future Trends of China’s Economic Development.” A speech given at the Shenzhen Business School of Peking University, Shenzhen, June 23. World Bank. 1991. World Development Report 1991: The Challenge of Development. New 
York: Oxford University Press for the World Bank. ———. 1993. World Development Report 1993: Investing in Health. New York: Oxford 
University Press for the World Bank. Zhang, Li. 2005. Speech given at Peking University on December 28, 2005, Beijing, China. Zhao, Lu. 2007. China’s Financial Policy for Supporting Post-Compulsory Education. Beijing: 
Ministry of Finance, PRC, Department of Education, Sciences, and Culture. 
Higher Education and Migration: Brain Drain and Sharing Skills in the Region 
Much attention has been paid to how the emigration of skilled workers affects the returns to educational investments in low-income countries. Data recently have been put together that provide a global picture of the extent to which persons receiving their tertiary education in low-income countries end up residing in developed countries and the proportion of tertiary-educated persons from a country who are living abroad (Beine, Docquier, and Rapoport 2006). The overall rate of either measure is high, suggesting that education policies in low-income countries need to be attentive to skilled emigration, either of persons with tertiary schooling or those seeking to acquire it. These “brain drain” statistics, however, ignore the facts that many students born and residing in low-income (and high-income) countries acquired their tertiary schooling outside the country and that high-income countries are a major source of tertiary training for students from low-income countries. 
The total number of international students in the world is large. The United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) reports that in 2005 more than 2 million students were enrolled in tertiary institutions as foreign (nonresident) students; 52.4 percent of these were from Asian countries, just slightly below Asia’s share of the world population (56.5 percent). Which countries are providing schooling to the world? Five countries—the United States, United Kingdom, Australia, Japan, and Germany—account for almost 80 percent of the stock of foreign students. This group of five countries also constitutes the principal destination for students from Asia, accounting for 76.3 percent of total Asian enrollment. As seen in figure 1, the United States is by far the major destination for Asian students, accounting for almost a third of the total population of Asian students acquiring tertiary education abroad. 
Mark R. Rosenzweig is the Frank Altschul Professor of International Economics and director of the Economic Growth Center at Yale University. He is grateful to two referees for helpful comments. 
Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics 2008, Regional © 2008 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank 
59 
Higher Education and International Migration in Asia: Brain Circulation 
MARK R. ROSENZWEIG 
60 | MARK R. ROSENZWEIG 
FIGURE 1 Percentage of All Asian Students Studying Abroad in Tertiary Schools in Top Five Receiving Countries, 2004 Percent Studying Abroad 
35 
302520151050United States United Kingdom Australia Japan Germany 
Source: UNESCO data. 
There is no information on the total number of tertiary-educated residents of lowincome countries who acquired their higher education abroad. Thus it is not known to what extent the brain drain statistics overestimate the net loss of human capital. Nor has there been, up to now, reliable information on the proportion of foreign students who do not return to their home country. The impact of externally obtained higher education on the origin countries of foreign students can be large, however. Spilimbergo (2007) examines the educational background of the leaders of 113 countries in 1990 and finds that 57 percent of them were educated abroad, 22 percent in just three countries—the United States, the United Kingdom, and France. Three of the leaders of the 13 Asian countries in his database were educated outside their home country, two in the United States. 
An older theoretical literature emphasizes the loss of human capital to low-income countries and thus the potentially negative effects of the emigration of skilled workers on economic development (for example, Bhagwati and Hamada 1974). An influential newer literature (Beine, Docquier, and Rapoport 2001, 2008; Mountford 1997; Stark, Helmenstein, and Prskawetz 1998) suggests, however, that the emigration of skilled workers can increase the educational investments of sending countries. The idea is that the prospects of emigrating to a country where skills are rewarded more generously can lead not only to more investment in skills in the home country but also to a more highly educated domestic population. The expected gains to schooling investments are thus a weighted average of the remuneration of the persons schooled in the home country and in a potential destination country, where the weights are based on the probability of emigrating. 
HIGHER EDUCATION AND INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION IN ASIA | 61 
There are two problems with the “brain gain” framework. First, for most countries, the probability that a domestically educated tertiary-educated person can permanently emigrate to a high-income country is very small, so the effect of the “risk” of emigrating on the acquisition of domestic schooling is not large. Second, the literature ignores the endogeneity of the emigration probability at the individual level. In particular, it ignores the fact that the choice of location of tertiary education significantly affects the probability that a person can emigrate permanently. Potentially, a student receiving his or her education in a high-income country has advantages in that country’s marriage market1 and labor market compared with a person who seeks a mate or a job in a high-income country while residing in a lowincome country. That is, obtaining tertiary schooling abroad is an important route to emigration. Indeed, unlike for many visas, there are no country ceilings or kinship requirements for student visas. And, as we show in this paper, the probability that a foreign-trained student will remain in the host country (the United States) is on the order of 20 percent, far higher than the overall emigration probability for a domestically schooled student. 
Clearly higher education policy in low-income countries must be attentive not only to emigration issues but also to the alternative of outsourcing higher education abroad. Deciding on higher education policies in a poor country thus requires answering a number of questions. Is educational outsourcing, and thus the exploitation of higher education subsidies in high-income countries, a cost-effective alternative to expensive domestic investments in higher education?2 Indeed, do investments in higher education at home even reduce the flow of students who seek schooling abroad? Does foreign schooling reflect a lack of investments in domestic schooling or just the low rewards to schooling compared with the high-income countries where schooling is sought? How large is the permanent loss of internationally trained students? These are the questions considered in this paper. 
In the first section, a simple model of the international pricing of skills and choice of schooling location is set out to clarify issues and motivate the subsequent empirical analysis. There are four key implications of the model in which students are seeking to maximize the gains from emigration: (a) More schooled persons always gain more from emigration to a country that provides higher rewards for skills. Students are more likely to choose schooling abroad (b) the larger the gap in the rewards to skills between the home country and the host country, (c) the lower the quality of domestic schools, and (d) the higher the incomes in the domestic economy. The second section is concerned with measuring the global rewards for skills—the price of skills across countries. Estimates are presented of skill prices for 19 Asian countries, showing the enormous cross-country disparities in rewards for skills. In the next two sections estimates are presented of the determinants, respectively, of the distribution of the stock of foreign students who obtain their schooling in the United States, the dominant host country for foreign students, and the determinants of the students’ choice of host country in which to obtain their schooling. The fifth section is concerned with measuring the stay rates of foreign students and their determinants; it also presents the estimated stay rates for foreign students in the United States and the determinants of their return rates across sending countries. 
62 | MARK R. ROSENZWEIG 
The main empirical findings are as follows: 
1. The pattern of student flows across countries is consistent with the hypothesis that students acquire schooling abroad in order to obtain jobs in the host country: there are larger per capita numbers of foreign students in the United States from lower skill-price countries than from high skill-price countries, and host countries with higher skill prices attract the most foreign students, controlling for the quality and quantity of tertiary institutions in the sending and host countries. 
2. Increasing the number of colleges and universities in a sending country with a low skill price, given the quality of its higher education institutions, increases, not decreases, the number of students who seek (graduate-level) education abroad, as it increases the number of persons with higher gains from emigrating. 
3. Improving the quality of domestic tertiary institutions decreases student outflows. 
4. Higher-income students gain the most from foreign schooling: among countries with similar rewards to skills, those that are richer and closer to the host country send more students abroad for schooling, for a given quantity and quality of domestic education. 
5. Asian students are more likely to migrate to the United States for schooling, net 
of differences in skill price and educational quality and quantity. 
6. The proportion of foreign students who remain in the United States as permanent immigrants is approximately 20 percent, but the proportion of students from Asian countries who do so is only about 14 percent. Those students from Asia who do immigrate are highly schooled compared to students from other regions and tend to be disproportionately computer scientists, engineers, and natural scientists. There are few professionals among any of the immigrating foreign students. 
7. Return rates of foreign students from the United States are higher for countries with higher skill prices, with Asian students more likely to return net of skill-price effects. However, on net, lower skill-price countries, for a given population size, have larger domestic stocks of foreign-trained persons compared with high skillprice countries. Thus, although there is a tax in the form of the loss of a fraction of highly skilled persons to host countries that supply tertiary schooling, the tax is highest for low skill-price countries, and such countries disproportionately accrue a net brain gain from the outsourcing of tertiary education. 
Theoretical Framework 
To understand how the economic returns to acquiring schooling in a foreign country are related to migration gains and to the returns to and quality of domestic schooling, it is useful to set out a simple theoretical framework. The simplest model is one with a single type of skill. The earnings or wage, Wij, of an individual i in country j 
HIGHER EDUCATION AND INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION IN ASIA | 63 
is then the product of the country-specific price of skill j—the skill price—and the number of skill units, xij, possessed by i: 
(1) Wij jxij. 
Skill units are produced in school. The relationship between skill units and schooling, S, is given by 
(2) xij ije S, 
where ij is the baseline skill of a worker and is a parameter that translates years of schooling into skill units—a higher implies that a year of schooling produces more skill units, so naturally represents the quality of schooling. Within a country, if is high, school quality (the domestic “return” to schooling) is high, and higher-S individuals will earn proportionally more than lower-S individuals compared with a country in which is low. Across countries, however, differences in earnings for a person with the same number of years of schooling S also will reflect differences in the price paid for a unit of skill. As we will see, prices of skill, j, differ substantially more across countries than do the returns to domestic schooling, . The gains from out-migration are dominated by cross-country differences in skill prices. 
Consider the choice of schooling location for a student i residing in country j. Schooling taken abroad has two potential benefits. First, it may enhance the prospects for receiving a job abroad, at a higher skill price. Second, schools abroad may be of higher quality, so the foreign-trained student will earn more at home than if she acquires the schooling domestically. If pA is the probability of getting a job in the destination country, u, where schooling is taken and reflects the quality of schools there, then the expected wage if one unit of schooling is taken abroad is given by 
(3) E(Wij)A pA ue (1 pA) je , 
where (0 1) measures the extent to which schooling acquired abroad is of less value in the home country than in the destination country.3 
If the net direct cost of acquiring schooling outside the country—for example, travel costs, foreign language training, and the extra tuition—is CA, then the expected gain from schooling broad, GA, is 
(4) GijA pA ue j[(1 pA)e e ] CijA. 
Equation 4 assumes that the probability of obtaining a permanent job abroad if schooling is acquired domestically is nil. What is necessary for the analysis is that pA must be greater than the probability of getting a job without foreign schooling. In the U.S. case, the probability for a randomly selected individual depends on the probability that the person has an immediate relative abroad (an infinitesimal probability) or wins the diversity visa lottery. For a person in an eligible country, that probability is less than 0.5 percent.4 Moreover, for an analysis of schooling choice in Asia, it is notable that six of the 16 countries not eligible for the lottery visa are in Asia (China, India, Pakistan, the Philippines, Republic of Korea, and Vietnam).5 For persons in 
64 | MARK R. ROSENZWEIG 
these countries, there is even less opportunity to emigrate. As we will see, however, the probability that a foreign student in the United States will obtain a permanent visa is as high as 20 percent. 
We assume that a student will go abroad for schooling if equation 4 is positive and will seek a destination among multiple destinations in which the net gain is highest. Thus the fraction of students who migrate from country j to acquire schooling abroad will be a function of the determinants of the average gain from doing so; that is, 
(5) mj g(GjA) g(pA, u, j,Cj A, , , ). 
There are a number of testable implications from the model. First, if direct costs of acquiring schooling are high, then parental resources will matter, or, at the country level, richer countries will have more students studying abroad, everything else remaining the same. In contrast, however, in origin countries with high skill prices but with the same level of income, the gains from schooling abroad are likely to be smaller. The effect on the gain and thus the magnitude of student out-migration from a rise in the domestic skill price is given by equation 6: 
(6) GA/ j (1 pA)e e . 
As can be seen, the relationship between the foreign-schooling gain and the home skill price is more likely to be negative the higher is the probability PA of obtaining a foreign job via schooling abroad and the lower is the premium for foreign schooling at home ( low). Indeed, if domestic and foreign schooling yield approximately the same return in the home country and students seek (higher-paying) jobs abroad, the higher skill-price countries will always have fewer students abroad: 
(7) GA/ j pAe 0 if . 
Note that if acquiring schooling in a foreign country with a higher skill price does not increase the employment prospects there (PA 0), the only reasons for acquiring schooling abroad are the lower costs or higher quality of foreign schools. If the latter is true ( ), then countries with high skill prices (and low-quality schools) will send more students abroad. The sign of the relationship between the number of students from a country studying abroad and its skill price thus reveals whether studying abroad is motivated, in part, by the desire to migrate permanently. Moreover, if job prospects abroad are a motive for foreign schooling, it will also be true that an increase in the price of skill in a destination country will increase the expected gain from acquiring schooling in that country and lead to more foreign students studying there. 
(8) GA/ u pAe 0. 
Increasing the quality of domestic schooling will, however, reduce the net gain from acquiring schooling abroad, whether or not schooling abroad enhances employment at the destination, and thus will reduce the outflow of students: 
(9) GA/ je 0. 
HIGHER EDUCATION AND INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION IN ASIA | 65 
Finally, an increase in the quality of foreign schools will increase the gain from obtaining foreign schooling and thus attract more students from abroad, but that gain will be smaller, the smaller the probability of getting a foreign job and the smaller the domestic gain from foreign schooling, . 
(10) GA/ pA ue j [(1 pA)e 0. 
Estimating World Skill Prices 
Using the skill-price framework to examine the determinants of the flow of students across countries requires information on the wages of workers with the same skills across all countries of the world. With such data, it is relatively straightforward to identify skill prices. In particular, substituting equation 2 into equation 1 and taking logs yields the familiar log-linear wage equation: 
(11) Ln(Wij) Ln j jSij Ln ij. 
In this case, each country has its own intercept and perhaps a different return to domestic schooling.6 The country-specific intercepts in equation 11 are the countryspecific skill prices. 
All prior empirical analyses of international migration have used GDP per capita or, in rare cases, GDP per worker as the relevant “wage” affecting migration gains. However, as the model makes clear, what matters is how cross-country earnings differ for a worker of given skill, which is the skill price. Per capita GDP varies across countries due to differences in age composition, labor force participation rates, and the average level of skill of the workforce, all of which are irrelevant from the perspective of a worker deciding whether and where to migrate (or acquire schooling). 
The principal barrier to obtaining skill prices is the absence of comparable data on the earnings of workers by skill for many countries of the world. Two sources of data are used here. The first is the predecessor survey to the New Immigrant Survey, the New Immigrant Survey Pilot (NIS-P), which provides the home-country earnings for a sample of new legal immigrants admitted to legal permanent residence in the United States during the months of July and August 1996. The sample size for adult immigrants is 1,032. Details on the survey are given in Jasso and others (2000). Of the sampled immigrants, 332, representing 54 countries, had worked outside the United States prior to immigrating and provided earnings data for their last job there. Information on work time and pay periods were used to adjust for differences in labor supply across workers in order to convert all data on pay to full-time earnings. The advantage of this data source is that earnings were elicited in a common survey frame, and there is information on the number of years of schooling for each worker along with gender and age. Thus the cross-country wage (equation 11) can be estimated directly. The disadvantage is that the immigrants are not a random sample of workers in the home country. 
The second source of information that can be used to estimate skill prices is the Occupational Wages around the World (OWW) database, compiled by Freeman and Oostendorp (2000). This source provides monthly wage data for men in 161 
66 | MARK R. ROSENZWEIG 
occupations in more than 150 countries from 1983 to 2003, derived from the International Labour Organisation’s October Inquiry database. Presumably, within countries the data are representative of all workers, but not all countries are represented in all years, and fewer countries appear to have participated in more recent years. For this analysis, data from 1995 were selected, which is a year with a peak number of countries and close in time to the NIS-P information on wages. In that year, there are 4,924 observations representing 67 countries. Monthly earnings from the series expressed in U.S. dollars based on exchange rates, as estimated by Freeman and Oostendorp, are used.7 The disadvantages of this data set are that the information across countries may not be comparable. Moreover, there is no information on the schooling or age of workers. Instead, the set of occupational indicators must be used to standardize across workers for skills. In particular, for the OWW data set, skill units are a nonparametric function of industry and occupation; that is, 
(12) xij ijexp(Iijk k), 
so that 
(13) Ln(Wij) Ln j Iijk k Ln ij, 
where Iijk is a vector of occupation or industry dummies for worker i in country j, and k is a vector of coefficients. Again, the country-specific set of intercepts provides the set of skill prices for 67 countries for 1995.8 
Both of the data sets provide comparable information on skill prices for, at most, only 67 countries. To predict skill prices for more countries, Rosenzweig (2006) uses information on aggregate country characteristics that are available for a large number of countries to estimate the proximate determinants of skill prices from the comparable worldwide microwage data. The analysis makes use of the fact that the skill price is the marginal value product of skill and assumes that aggregate output for country j is produced according to Cobb-Douglas technology. The estimation procedure also attempts to correct for the selectivity of the NIS-P immigrant sample, that selectivity being based on the decision to immigrate. The estimates are used to predict skill prices for countries without sampled workers. One shortcoming of using the NIS-P base for predicting skill prices is that, because of the limited degrees of freedom, it is not possible to allow the return to schooling to differ across countries. Similarly, for the analysis of OWW earnings, the coefficient vector for industry and occupation is assumed to be invariant to country. 
Figure 2 displays the NIS-P and OWW estimates of skill prices for 19 Asian countries. The figure shows that both sets of data yield similar, but not identical, skillprice estimates (the correlation across all countries is more than 0.66). Both sets of estimates indicate the substantial differences in skill prices across countries within Asia. For example, the skill price in Singapore is 9 to 12 times that in Bangladesh, and the skill price in Korea is 3.4 to 5.5 times the skill price in Bangladesh. To see how these differences in skill price translate into differences in earnings by level of schooling, we can compute earnings for any level of schooling and return to schooling, , using equation 11 for any country based on its skill price. Figure 3 shows the 
HIGHER EDUCATION AND INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION IN ASIA | 67 
FIGURE 2 Estimated Skill Price for 19 Asian Countries, by NIS-P and OWW Sources 
Taiwan Singapore Hong Kong Malaysia Japan Korea Thailand Pakistan China Indonesia Bangladesh Philippines Vietnam Sri Lanka Nepal Laos Mongolia India Cambodia 
0 2,000 4,000 6,000 8,000 
Purchasing power parity–adjusted 1995 dollars 
Source: Author’s calculations based on OWW Database (Freeman and Oostendorp 2005); Jasso and others (2000). 
4,000 
3,000 
2,000 
1,0000 
OWW skill price ( 10) NIS–P skill price 
10,000 12,000 14,000 16,000 
FIGURE 3 Estimated Earnings of High School and College Graduates across Select Countries with a Common 7 Percent “Return” to Schooling Purchasing Power Parity–Adjusted 1996 Dollars Using NIS-P Skill Prices 
7,000 
High school graduate 6,000 
College graduate 
5,000 
Nigeria India Indonesia Mexico Korea, Rep. of 
Source: OWW Database (Freeman and Oostendorp 2005); Jasso and others 2000; Rosenzweig 2006. 
68 | MARK R. ROSENZWEIG 
estimated earnings for a select number of countries, based on the NIS-P estimated skill price for each country under the assumption that the return to schooling, , is the same in each country and is 7 percent (the estimated world return in Rosenzweig 2006). As can be seen, earnings for persons of comparable schooling differ substantially across countries. 
There are two important features of figure 3. First, the gains from migration (cross-country differences in earnings) are greater the higher the level of schooling of the individual. The migration of skilled persons from low to high skill-price countries leads to greater global gains in output. Second, raising the level of schooling in each country—say, so all have a college education, even ignoring the depression of skill prices via a general-equilibrium effect—would do very little to decrease the differences in earnings across countries. Put another way, equalizing cross-country skillprice differences would have a substantially greater impact on world inequality than would equalizing education levels across countries. 
How do differences in domestic returns to schooling across countries affect differences in global earnings? In figure 4, earnings for high school and college graduates are computed for Bangladesh and Korea, based on their NIS-P skill prices but assuming alternative rates of return to schooling of 7 and 10 percent. As can be seen, increasing domestic returns to schooling significantly affects earnings; if returns to schooling reflect school quality, then increasing school quality in a low skill-price country can, for a given level of schooling, reduce earnings disparities relative to high skill-price countries. Thus an increase in the return to schooling from 0.07 to 0.1 in Bangladesh, while keeping the return to schooling in Korea at 0.07, shrinks the 
FIGURE 4 Estimated Annual Earnings in Bangladesh and Korea, by Level of Schooling and Return to Schooling 
12,000 
High school College 
10,000 
8,000 
6,000 
4,000 
2,0000 
Bangladesh 
Korea ( 0.07) 
( 0.07) 
Source: Author’s calculations based on Jasso and others 2000. 
Bangladesh ( 0.10) 
Korea ( 0.10) 
HIGHER EDUCATION AND INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION IN ASIA | 69 
absolute differential in the earnings of college graduates across the two countries by 26 percent. However, the absolute gap remains large. Moreover, an increase in the return to schooling in both countries widens the gap even more at the college level. Of course, raising school quality, if it changes the amount of skill in the economy, would reduce the skill price (ignoring large trade effects). One question is whether increasing the quality of domestic schooling for a given domestic skill price would decrease the outflow of students to study abroad, as suggested in the migration cum schooling model. We now turn to estimates of the determinants of foreign student outflows. 
Where Do U.S. Foreign Students Come From? Determinants of Student Outflows to the United States 
We first estimate an approximation to the student outflow equation (5) using data on the number of students by country of origin who are studying in tertiary institutions in the United States. As we have seen, the United States is the dominant country of destination for foreign students both globally and from Asia. Data from the United States are also used because there is reasonably precise information on student enrollment in tertiary institutions by source country and because, as discussed below, there is unique information on foreign students who remain in the United States after completing their schooling. This makes it possible to estimate the loss of human capital associated with foreign study. 
There are two sources of data on foreign students in the United States: counts of F-1 student visas issued each year by the State Department and the Student and Exchange Visitor Information System (SEVIS), which provides information by country on the stock of current foreign-born students. The advantage of the latter is that all foreign-born students are required to register in the system. Because Canadian citizens do not need an F-1 visa to study in the United States, they are not included in the State Department flow data. Moreover, the SEVIS data exclude family members of students, who are included in the visa flow information. And the State Department visa counts include persons who do not actually use their visa to come to the United States. We use here the SEVIS data on the current stock (2006) of students in the United States by country.9 
Inspection of the SEVIS data indicate that all of the top five sending countries for students enrolled in U.S. schools are in Asia: in order, Korea, India, China, Japan, and Taiwan (China). Indeed, seven of the top 10 countries of origin are in Asia (Thailand and Indonesia are 9 and 10). This list obviously contains a mixture of high and low skill-price Asian countries, as well as countries of very different sizes, and thus is not very informative about how origin-country skill prices influence student flows. To carry out the analysis of how skill prices and the quantity and quality of colleges and universities affect the number of students who come to the United States to study, more information is needed than the skill prices. 
To characterize the number and quality of domestic universities and colleges, we add to the database the number of universities in each country and a variable 
70 | MARK R. ROSENZWEIG 
indicating whether any of the country’s universities were ranked in the top 200 of all universities in the world from the Times Higher World University Rankings for 2005.10 We also compute the mean rank of the ranked universities, if any. If domestic quality lowers the gains from foreign study, we would expect that countries with ranked universities would, everything else remaining the same, experience smaller outflows of students. Similarly, the lower the mean rank (the higher the quality) of the universities, the greater the outflow of students. The effects on student outflows of the number of universities, for a given quality, are less clear. Approximately half of foreign students in the United States come as graduate students (IIE 2006); increasing the supply of college graduates in a country thus increases the potential supply of graduate students who study abroad. To the extent that graduate study in a foreign country improves the prospects of obtaining a foreign job and thus an immigrant visa, building domestic capacity in universities, without improving quality, could increase per capita rates of (graduate) study abroad and thus increase the risk of losing the best and brightest. 
Three variables are included that are related to the cost of acquiring schooling abroad. The first is the surface distance from the capital of each country to the nearest port of entry for immigrants in the United States, which we assume to be positively correlated with the costs of migration. The second variable is whether or not English is an official language of the sending country. Presumably, given that the language of instruction in the United States is English, students from countries in which English is prevalent face lower costs of studying in the United States. Finally, financing education abroad is costly: as reported by the Institute of International Education (IIE 2006), the primary source of funding is “personal and family” for about 64 percent of foreign students (about half for graduate students and more than 82 percent for undergraduates). Thus income matters for study abroad. We add the sending country’s GDP per adult-equivalent to the database, which we assume is positively related to the average capacity of individuals to finance migration. Thus, for a given skill price, a country with a higher GDP per adult-equivalent should be observed to send more migrants. Economic growth can increase out-migration, if it is not accompanied by sufficient increases in skill prices. In prior analyses of international migration, GDP is used to proxy wage rates, thus mixing together skill prices and financing constraints. 
Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for the country database, and table 2 reports estimates of the origin country-specific determinants of the number of foreign students studying in the United States for two specifications: one using the NIS-P skillprice estimates and the other using the OWW-based estimates of skill prices. Both specifications include the size of the sending-country population. All variables are in log form.11 
The estimated skill-price coefficients are consistent with the implication of the model: students obtaining schooling outside their home country are motivated, in part, by the gains from permanent migration in the country where they go for their schooling—the number of U.S. students from a country outside the United States is negatively and significantly related to its skill price. Recall that if all students expect to return, a rise in the domestic skill price would increase the demand for schooling
