Personnel Policy for the Institutions  of Higher Education  Salesian Province of Kolkata  March 2018  1  Personnel Policy for the Institutions of Higher Education  Salesian Province of Kolkata  0. FRAMEWORK  0.1. Don Bosco, Priest and Educator, founded the Salesian Congregation to carry out his  educational and pastoral project for young people with a focus on the marginalised. His vision is  carried out today by the Salesians. For organizational purpose they are divided into provinces and  individual institutions and need policies for their personnel. This policy is for institutes of Higher  Education in the Province of Kolkata.  0.2. Every college/institution of Higher education which is a Don Bosco institution of the  Province, is owned and administered under the authority of the Salesian Province of Calcutta  (Northern India) which is the Founder Body. Each such Institution, if a separate Registered  Society, is a subsidiary of the above mentioned Founder Body, and/or of such an Institution that  has only the use of the properties, both moveable and immovable, and not the ownership thereof,  and/or incase acquired by the society in loco, it will belong to the said society.  0.3. The Head of the Institution as well as all other Religious personnel of the College are to be  appointed by the Founder body, which in this case is the Salesian Province of Calcutta (Northern  India), headed by the Provincial, who retains the right to transfer the Religious personnel or to  change their duties.  0.4. The Ordinary affairs of the college are to be managed by a duly constituted Governing Body  following the directions of the Founder body  0.5. The day-to-day administration of the College is vested in the Principal in collaboration with  the Vice Principals of the respective campuses, who carry out all the activities in consultation and  collaboration with other religious members appointed by the Founder Body.  1. TERMS & DEFINITIONS  In this Policy, unless there is anything repugnant to in the subject or the context thereof:  1.1. Founder Body means The Salesian Province of Calcutta (Northern India) i.e. The  Provincial and his Council, which established, owns and manages the College.  1.2. Society means the Salesian College Sonada Registered Society.  1.3. College Coordination Council: means the Salesians (Rectors/Principal/Vice  Principals/Bursars) entrusted by the Founder body with the responsibility for all the activities  related to the Institutions of Higher Education.  2  1.4. Governing Body means the Governing Body of the Institute, constituted in law and duly  appointed by the Founder Body. Governing Body is to manage the ordinary affairs of the  college in respect of the curriculum, ratification and approval of the appointments, discipline,  legal matters, new initiatives and carrying out of the educational policy of the Founder Body.  1.5. College means the Salesian College Sonada affiliated to the North Bengal University  (1935/1962) and its campus, Salesian College Siliguri (2009), its research centre at Dhajea  (2017) belonging to the Salesian College Sonada registered society and including its future  expansions.  1.6. Minority College means a college owned, established and run by a minority community  by virtue of rights conferred by Clause 1 of Art. 30 of the Constitution of India.  1.7. Rector means the Religious Head of the Institution (s) appointed by the Founder Body,  who is responsible for the implementation of the policies and objectives of Salesian Higher  Education in the respective campus(es).  1.8. Secretary: The Secretary, on behalf of the Governing body takes care of major decisions,  such as appointment of staff, all correspondences for new initiatives, legal matters, liaison  with public bodies and extraordinary matters of discipline.  1.9. Principal means executive head of the College who is ultimately responsible for the  implementation of the policies and objectives of the college as per Govt. / UGC /University  rules and norms, the overall administration of the College with its different campuses and the  liaison with other authorities, educational or civil or otherwise. On all decisions related to the  faculty and students of the campus (es), the principal will consult the college coordination  council.  1.10. Treasurer means one who has the responsibility of the financial administration of the  College and matters assigned to him by the Constitutions and Regulations of the Salesian  Society in keeping with Govt/UGC/University rules. He may also be referred to as the  Bursar/Economer.  1.11. Employees/Faculty/Staff means all persons appointed to function in the College as  Faculty/Researchers, Office/Clerical or supportive/Grade IV or such other staff  employed/appointed by the College.  1.12. Academic Council means the academic consultative body consisting of  Principal/Rector(s)/Vice Principal(s)/Assistant principal(s)/Registrar/Deans/Heads of  Departments/Campus Minister(s)/ and Campus Coordinators and who are entrusted towards  the ordinary planning and review of the day to day affairs of the academic life of the college  and its campus.  3  2. FOUNDER BODY AND ADMINISTRATION  2.1. The Founder Body of Salesian College, is the Salesian Province of Calcutta (Northern  India) with its present registered office at 52A, Radhanath Chowdhury Road, Calcutta, 700 015. It  is legally constituted and run according to the Constitutions and Regulations of the Salesian  Society, Canon Law of the Catholic Church and the Memorandum and Rules of the Registered  Society (Society Registration No. S/3361 of 1958-59.). The Founder Body, though has the  ultimate responsibility for the management of the Institution, exercises its authority in loco  through the Governing Body constituted in accordance with Article 178 of the Salesian Society’s  Constitutions and prevailing Govt/UGC/University norms. It reserves to itself certain rights in  relation to Education and Policies. It retains the right to determine and/or approve all policy  matters in all areas of College life: Christian Doctrine, Value Education, Intellectual-Moral  Physical education and the formation of the students. The Founder Body is also responsible for  approving the personnel policy. It recognizes the Educational Pastoral Plans of the Province and  promotes them within the College. It is the ultimate appellate body.  2.2. The Founder Body retains the following rights in relation to general administration:  1) To expand or alter its nature or status or to close down the college.  2) To approve, the medium, Universities of Affiliation, or change the same.  3) To upgrade/downgrade the college, add or eliminate sections/departments.  4) To give directions regarding the prospectus, salary scales and fee structure.  5) To spell out the policies in keeping with the socio-political needs of the context and the  Catholic philosophy, aims and objectives of the Salesian Society.  6) The Founder Body has the right to appoint, transfer and terminate the services of the  Rector / Principal / Secretary/ Jt secretary, Vice-Principal, Treasurer/Jt. Treasurer and  Heads of Departments of the College, irrespective of their being Salesian or non-Salesian  personnel.  7) At regular intervals it may review the criteria, procedure and policy for all appointments  as the Govt/UGC/University rules may require. It frames directives for the continuous  education and updating of the teaching faculty and gives directions as to promote the ethos  and mission of the founder body.  2.3. Property:  a) Final control and ownership of all immovable and movable properties and assets belong to  the concerned society(ies); for any transactions the following must be respected.  4  b) Permission in writing from the Founder Body is required for any formal agreement regarding leasing, renting or taking loans and granting permission to use the premises.  c) This will be done through a contract which will be signed by the society on behalf of the  Founder Body.  d) All alterations to the existing ground and buildings as well as all new constructions require  the written permission of the Founder Body at the request of the College Coordination  Council. The execution of them will be left to the Governing Body through the Finance  and Construction Committee of the College. (cfr. UGC manual)  2.4. The Society:  The Salesian College Sonada Registered Society is constituted by the above mentioned founder  body to carry out various educational, research, extension and other charitable activities. The  Society operates through: 2.4.1, 2.4.2 & 2.4.3.  2.4.1. The College Coordination Council  The College Coordination Council consisting of members of the Salesian Society appointed by  the Founder Body is an extension of the Founder Body and shall consist of Rectors/Principal/Vice  Principals/Treasurers or any other persons appointed by the Founder Body to uphold all matters  academic and non academic.  Its competence and limitations are set out in the Society’s Constitutions and Regulations and the  Directory of the Province. Within this competence and limitations, the College Coordination  Council shall execute the policies and directions given by the Founder Body and Society for the  common objectives of the College. The council takes into consideration the policies of the  Government/UGC/University for Higher Education.  The College Coordination Council shall ordinarily meet every two months and necessarily before  every Governing Body meeting.  2.4.2. The Governing Body:  The Founder Body shall appoint members of the Governing Body in accordance with provisions  as laid down in its Constitution taking into consideration relevant recommendation regarding the  same from the University/ies to which the College is affiliated.  2.4.3. Finance Committee:  a) The Founder Body shall exercise its control over all the finances of the College through  the Finance Committee. Such control shall be complete and absolute.  5  b) The Finance Committee shall exercise the right to issue directions on financial policies  and administration to the Salesian College Registered Society, the college coordination  council and Governing Body in matters of finance, calling for the audit report or any  explanation on it, including financial report and or books of accounts at any time.  c) Wherever financial involvement above 15 lakhs, a written permission from the Founder  Body is required for all matters regarding contracts with civil or educational (university  research centre authorities or any individual or society)  d) For all changes to the proposed and approved plans for construction/campus  development a prior screening by the construction committee and finance committee and  approval by the College Coordination Council and Governing Body is mandatory. (cfr.  UGC norms for construction)  2.4.4. Other Matters:  The Founder Body has the right to deal with all other matters, as circumstances may demand, in  order to further achieve the objectives of the College and its effective administrative management  as per UGC/NAAC criteria.  The Founder Body shall make annual inspection of all the areas of the institution and gives timely  directions for enhancing the services offered keeping the ideals of the Founder Body through its  commission heads (Finance Committee and Higher Education Commission) of the Province.  3. GOVERNING BODY OF THE INSTITUTE  3.1. Constitution:  The Governing Body shall be constituted by the Founder Body in consultation with the College  Coordination Council and in accordance with the Memorandum of the Society and the  Association of Catholic Colleges, Xavier Board and Salesian University Institution (IUS) in  accordance with the privileges and minority rights granted by the Constitution of India and the  Code of Regulations for Christian Minority Colleges, West Bengal and/or the West Bengal  Council of Higher Education, and the Statutes of the University within whose jurisdiction the said  college is located, as the case may be.  The Governing Body shall be composed of: (1)Founder Body President, (2) Rector/s, (3)  Principal/Secretary/Jt Secretary, (4) Vice-Principal/s, (5) Treasurer/Jt.Treasurer, (6) One other  nominee of the Founder Body (Head of Departments or any others), (7) Two Teachers’  Representatives (Nominated/Elected by the eligible Faculty), (8) Representative/s of the  Parents/Guardians (Nominated/Selected) (9) Representative/s of the Alumni (nominated/Selected)  6  (10) A Local Educationist and (11) a senior educational administrator and any other person, as  need be.  3.2 Term of the Governing Body of the Institute:  a) The term of office of the Governing Body shall be four years, at the end of which it will be  reconstituted as per terms in 3.1. In cases of vacancies, for whatever reason, they shall be filled  up by the Founder Body for the remaining part of the four-year term.  b) The Faculty representative shall have to be a permanently appointed faculty, who has served  the College for a period of at least five years. A faculty may not normally be in the Governing  Body for more than two terms.  c) The Parents’ representative may cease to be a member at the end of the scholastic year if  his/her son/daughter ceases to be a student of the College.  d) The quorum for valid procedure shall be one member over and above half the strength of the  Governing Body i.e.50% + one.  e) Frequency: The Governing Body shall meet at least three times a year with a minimum of 15  day's notice. Emergency meetings may be held as and when required.  3.3. Powers and Duties of Governing Body  a) It is the responsibility of the Governing Body to see that the general running of the  College reflects the education policy of the College and promotes its academic atmosphere.  b) May lay down criteria, procedure and policy for appointment of staff including non-  teaching staff which is subjected to the approval of the Founder Body.  c) Approval of Selection Committee.  d) Approval of the terms and conditions of appointment and service conditions.  e) It frames directives for the continuous education and updating of teachers.  f) The Governing Body approves the appointment through the Principal/Secretary, the  Faculty & staff, other than the religious staff, and confirms, extends or terminates the  services of the same. Supportive, temporary/guest and Group D staff may be appointed by  the Vice Principal/JtSecretary on temporary basis subject to approval by the Governing  Body.  g) To select suitable candidates for teaching posts, it shall appoint the Selection Committee  as per West Bengal Govt G.O. Memo No. 2010 (7)-Edn (CS) / 4A-45/79, Dated 9th/11th October,  1979 for Christian minority colleges.  7  h) All disciplinary action, except in the case of minor penalties, are to be imposed by the  authority of the Governing Body through the Principal.  i) The Governing Body approves the list of holidays and the leaves taken by the staff.  j) The welfare of the staff is a concern of the Governing Body (disbursement of salaries and  allowances, personnel and professional staff development, etc.). It shall see that the  Personnel Policy is followed and propose to the Founder Body any alteration it may deem  necessary.  k) It will proposes and/or recommend to the Founder Body any alteration in the physical  nature of the College and other matters that are reserved with the Founder Body after  completing the due procedures of scrutiny and approval by Construction Committee,  Finance Committee and College Coordination Council.  l) Any other responsibility/duty, the Founder Body may deem fit to delegate to it.  m) The Governing Body’s decisions may be overruled or the Body itself may be suspended  by the Founder Body for grave reasons. The Founder Body, under such circumstances,  will make alternative arrangements to carry on the functioning of the College, for a period  not exceeding 6 months.  3.4. Roles and Duties of Members of the Governing Body of the Institute  3.4.1. Rector  a) As per the Salesian Constitution (c.176) the Rector 'is the first in order of responsibility  for the religious life, apostolic activities and administration of the community goods'.  b) Through a well-conceived sense of discipline and academic integrity, he promotes the  philosophy and policies of the Founder Body.  c) He is the Head and Convenor of the Educative Pastoral Community Council (EPCC)  which takes care of all the animation programmes of the institute taking care to prepare  the quality persons keeping the vision of the college.  d) He will be liaison between the local council and the college coordination council and the  Governing Body.  e) He is the appellate authority within the College on all internal matters, ecclesiastical,  administrative and otherwise.  f) He is responsible for documentation and should have copies of all title-deeds and  sanctioned plans, the original of which may be in the archives of the Founder Body. He  should have an inventory of the movable and immovable properties of the College and  also copies of the Audit Reports.  8  g) He is the ex-officio member of the Finance Committee, Career Advancement Screening,  Grievance Redressal Cell and Internal Quality Assurance Cell (IQAC).  h) He acts as the Counsellor of the college campus and supervises the implementation of the  Salesian Pedagogical system.  3.4.2. Principal  a) The Principal is appointed by the Founder Body, and shall perform his work in full  agreement with the College Coordination Council and the Governing Body.  b) His primary duty is to keep in check all the academic and non-academic activities of the  college so that they are carried out to the satisfaction of the University, Guardians and  Students.  c) He shall correspond with the affiliating University/ies on academic and non-academic  matters.  d) He shall be responsible for all promotions and detentions, upon consultation with College  Coordination Council.  e) He shall keep himself in touch with educational authorities and act in liaison with others.  f) He is responsible for the Parents’, Teachers’ & Students Association (PTSA) and its  regular meetings.  g) He shall convene and preside over General Academic Staff’, Academic Council, and  Internal Quality Assurance Cell (IQAC) meetings.  h) He shall be responsible to bring to the College Coordination Council and Governing Body  all the intake of faculty and admissions to the College. He shall take care of the Internal  Quality Assurance Cell (IQAC) as its Chairman to make sure of all its requirements  i) He shall convene the Finance Committee, the Construction Committee and the Purchase  Committee.  j) Appoint members to other committees like the Library Committee, Grievance Redressal,  Anti-Ragging, Sexual Harassment Vishakha Committee and others.  k) He shall ordinarily appoint in consultation with the Rector(s) and the Vice Principal(s), the  officials of the college like Campus Coordinators, HoDs, Event coordinators, Internal  Auditors, Deans and members to the Academic Councils, etc.  l) He shall be the ex-officio signatory for disbursement of salary and Government grants.  3.4.3. Secretary  a) The Secretary of the Governing Body shall be appointed by the Founder Body.  9  b) On behalf of the Founder Body and the Governing Body, the Secretary, appointed by the  Founder Body, shall see to the proper running of the College and ensure that the directions  and policies laid down by the Founder Body are carried out in the College.  c) He will be the authorized person to carry out the decisions of the governing Body  regarding appointments, terminations or any other legal step for all the employees. He  may also take decisions as per need for the regular functioning of the college; however  such decisions must be ratified by the Governing Body at its meeting.  d) He shall be authorised signatory on behalf of the Governing Body and may issue all letters  which are authorized by the Governing Body.  e) He shall convene the meetings of the Governing Body and College Coordination Council  and shall arrange the time, venue and agenda for such meeting.  f) He shall keep the records and minutes of the proceedings in a book kept for the purpose,  and submit them for confirmation at the next meeting.  g) The Secretary shall handle the correspondences with the members of the Governing Body,  and other staff members.  h) He shall preside over the election of the Teachers’ Representatives to the Governing  Body.  i) He will report to and /or notify the President/Founder Body, any vacancy in the Governing  Body and make arrangements to fill the vacancy. He will also arrange for the  reconstitution of the Governing Body when its term expires.  j) He will work in close collaboration with the representativea of the Founder Body in the  institution.  3.4.4. Joint Secretary  a) The joint Secretary works in close collaboration with the Secretary  b) The Joint secretary will carry out the decisions of the Founder Body and Governing Body  in the concerned campus.  c) He can authorize the appointment, promotion and detention of the Supportive Staff in the  concerned campus  d) Upon delegation by the Secretary/Principal he does all the above mentioned activities of  the Secretary in his absence  e) He shall share the above mentioned responsibility in understanding with the Secretary, as  and when required for the smooth, efficient and effective functioning of the Institution.  f) He shall appoint the HoDs of the concerned campus/departments.  10  3.4.5. Vice-Principal  The Vice-Principal shall take the place of the Principal in his absence and shall be the official  nominee for all official academic matters.  Ordinarily he has the following functions  a) He shall coordinate the academic activities of the college on a regular basis  b) He shall present the College calendar to the Governing body for approval  c) He shall keep himself well informed of examination requirements, educational progress  and creative models of teaching and evaluation.  d) He shall be responsible for the maintenance of all College records.  e) He shall follow up the regularity and work culture of the students and faculty members  f) He shall give monthly reports to the Principal regarding the various curricular and co-  curricular activities of the college  g) He shall work in close collaboration with the Principal/Secretary/Jt Secretary to uphold  unity in congruency in the various practices in the college.  h) He shall follow up the programmes planned in the Handbook & calendar  i) He shall Prepare the quarterly report for the GB meeting  j) For all the activities of an external nature such as inter-college activities, university  matters, he shall follow the directions given by the Principal  k) He shall convene ordinary meetings (departmental and sectional of the teaching and non-  teaching) for smooth and regular performance of staff and students.  l) In matters of serious disciplinary measures he shall follow the direction given by the  College Coordination Council/Principal  3.4.6. Assistant Principal  The Assistant Principal shall work in close collaboration with the Principal/Vice Principal to take  care of all the academic matters of the college.  Ordinarily S/he has the following functions  a) S/he shall supervise class regularity of students and faculty members.  b) S/he shall follow up the different publications of the departments  c) S/he shall work along with the campus coordinators for the various campus events: games,  cultural programmes and various competitions.  d) S/he shall monitor the regularity of weekly/monthly assessments  e) S/he shall follow up the students attendance in collaboration with HoDs  11  f) S/he shall keep a record of class leaders’ report on various academic activities.  3.5. Other members in authority  3.5.1. The Academic Council  The Academic Council shall consist of the Rector(s), Principal, Vice Principals, Assistant  Principals, Registrar, Deans, Campus Ministers, Campus Coordinators, Heads of Departments and  Head of Office Clerical staff. The Academic Council is a consultative body that shall make  suggestions for the academic advancement of the Institution and do annual plans and periodic  reviews of the academic processes of admission, registration, examinations and major curricular  cum co-curricular events.  3.5.1 Registrar  a) S/he shall ordinarily assist the Principal/Secretary in matters of appointments of staff  members.  b) S/he shall take care of the weekly, monthly and annual record of leaves, absences, early  and late departures of staff members.  c) Organise Annual evaluation of staff members.  d) S/he shall follow up the various departments to see that they do have sufficient  faculty/staff, sufficiently qualified and performing to students’ satisfaction.  3.5.2. Dean of School  a) The college consists of the different schools: School of Humanities and Social Sciences.  Science, Management, Education, Law and the like.  b) The Deans take care of the overall academic and disciplinary areas of the schools with the  collaboration of the HoDs.  c) S/he shall work closely in collaboration with the Principal/Vice Principal  d) The Board of Deans will see about coherence and smooth functioning of the Institution  keeping with the common goals.  3.5.3. Campus Minister  a) Campus minister shall take care of the Mental/emotional wellness of all in the campus. He  will look after the personality assessment report of the students; offers timely training  programmes or workshops/seminars to promote mental and emotional wellness.  b) He will meet faculty members/available to meet them personally as a counsellor  12  c) He will meet students as individuals or in groups on a regular basis to enable their mental  wellness and optimum performance, personality development & value/religious  instructions.  d) He will organise programmes of animation in consultation with the Vice Principal  e) Value education classes are to be coordinated by him as per the class schedule in  consultation with Vice-Principals and HoDs.  f) Cultural/national days are to be organised by the campus minister in understanding with  the Vice Principal (like swatch Bharat, Environment day, Women’s day, Teachers’ day,  etc.)  g) Being a Christian minority Institution he shall take care of the various practices of the  minority group to educate them in their faith: Holy Mass on first Fridays, Retreats,  Recollection days and other animation programmes without affecting the academic  programmes.  3.5.4. Campus Coordinator(s)  a) Campus coordinator is the close collaborator of the Vice Principal and Campus Minister  who looks after the day-to-day activities of the college following the Handbook &  calendar  b) Assist the Vice Principal and Campus Minister in maintaining the campus discipline  c) Manage the social outreach programmes.  d) Departmental outreach projects/tours are to be closely monitored by them  e) Intra and inter college activities are to be organized by them.  f) They will help students to get trained for the job market through various programmes in  collaboration with training and placement cells.  3.5.5. Head of Department:  a) Each Head of the Department shall be proposed by College Coordination Council and  appointed by the Joint Secretary and shall be responsible for the classes, the Teachers and  activities under her/his charge.  b) All ordinary disciplinary matters in his or her department are to be dealt with by him/her.  c) S/he will conduct periodic tests and examinations under the direction of the Vice-  Principal.  d) In understanding with the Vice-Principal, S/he may convene meetings of the Teachers of  her/his department.  e) The Parents are to be contacted to give them an account of their Ward’s academic/campus  performance  13  f) The HoD follows up the mentoring role of the students in the department and distributes  works and duties to the other faculty members of the department.  g) Coordinate the Semesterization and related exam duties.  h) Take charge of the COP/EVS/value education/ religious instructions and social awareness  programmes in collaboration with the Campus Minister.  i) Prepare the personality assessment of the students in the Department  j) Plan, raise resources, Organize Seminars, Workshops and other academic activities in  consultation with the Vice Principal.  k) Collaborate with other HoDs &Campus Coordinators/Ministers for the common  programmes of the college.  l) Looks after the departmental library and ensures access to study materials and resources.  S/he shall give timely updates on syllabus, Handbook & calendar and quarterly report to  the Vice-Principal.  3.5.6. The Treasurer(s)  a) They shall be Responsible for the administration of the goods of the College as well as all  financial transactions and accounting.  b) They shall supervise all non-teaching staff following the guidelines laid out in the personnel  policy and the prevailing labour laws of the State.  c) They shall be responsible for all fee collections on behalf of the College and the disbursement  of remuneration to the staff, and for all payments.  d) They shall execute all purchases and sales for the College following the budget/grant  allocations and required procedures. They shall carry out the decisions of the Finance Committee  and present a report in every Finance Committee meeting/College Coordination Council and GB  Meetings.  e) All the project/ grants have to be utilized as per Agency (UGC/UB/IFCU/ICSSR, etc.) and  records to be kept and ensure timely submission of the reports.  f) Every project/grant needs to be audited separately and merged to the main audit of the College  g) Responsible for all deductions (Provident Fund, Income Tax, Professional Tax, etc.) and for  the crediting of the same to the concerned Authority.  h) Caring for the proper cleanliness and maintenance of the College campus, buildings and  equipments.  14  i) Ex-officio signatory along with the Principal/Secretary/Joint Secretary of all bank accounts.  j) Shall be the one to arrange for the annual budget and audit. He shall propose the revision of  fees/salaries, if and when required, in consultation with College Coordination Council.  k) Responsible for all the financial records of the College.  l) Takes care of land papers, agreements, canteens, different types of taxes, etc  m) Responsible for maintenance of buildings, and the care of the campus and timely updating of  the reports.  n) Take care of final Auditing of all the financial transactions of all the expenses of the College as  a whole and takes legal responsibility for the Society, FCRA, Tax deductions, Scrutiny,  monthly/yearly returns and /any other matter regarding finance with the banks, Home Ministry or  any other financial or other Institutions as the case may be. However, for University/ UGC/ Govt.  grants and funds to be disbursed and audited through the Principal. The Principal shall be  responsible for the final Audit of both the campuses of the College  o) All project and grant applications are to be informed (in hard copies) to the Bursar who will  also see to the disbursal of the funds as per the project/grant with the guidance of the one  responsible for the project/grant. All accounts of the projects/grants will be maintained separately  for necessary auditing by the donor agencies.  3.5.7. IQAC Coordinator  a) Internal Quality Assurance Cell shall have an office and the Coordinator shall function in  collaboration with the Principal, who is the chairman of Internal Quality Assurance Cell  (IQAC).  b) He shall organise various audits (internal and external) to maintain quality in all the  departments with their different activities.  c) As all the activities are organised in the name of Internal Quality Assurance Cell (IQAC),  the Coordinator shall monitor their execution and document its records in the Internal  Quality Assurance Cell (IQAC) Office.  d) The Coordinator shall follow up all the evaluations conducted in the Institutions for  academic or non-academic activities.  e) Various activities are to be organised to improve the quality of service offered in the  Institution  f) Regular meetings of Internal Quality Assurance Cell (IQAC) are to be organised by the  Coordinator ensuring the presence of all the members.  15  3.5.8. Librarian(s)  a) Follow up the library norms to make sure that library becomes a student-friendly and  faculty-friendly place for learning  b) All the book orders are to be placed through the Librarian and S/he will see that the  ordered books have arrived, are catalogued and are stacked.  c) S/he shall follow up Departmental libraries and records.  d) S/he shall carry out the yearly stock verification.  e) Organise display of publications for all common events of the College.  f) Maintain the digitisation of all records and updating of softwares in consultation with  Vice-Principals and Treasurers.  g) Give quarterly feedback to the Vice-Principal and Finance Committee.  4. EMPLOYEES’ STATUS AND CLASSIFICATION  All the employees of the Institution need to have undergone an orientation programme to be  aware of the Institutional culture which is very unique, being a Don Bosco Institution. The faculty  members need to complete the certificate course prior to their permanent appointment. This could  be by attending the programmes organised by the Founder Body or by the College. This will  consist of knowing the life of Don Bosco, brief history of the Organisation, the College,  knowledge of Preventive System of Education and general information on quality instruction  systems in higher Education by imparting knowledge that is life oriented and market oriented.  The Don Bosco way available in the College website shall be the course material for the  mandatory certificate programme.  All the staff members are to uphold the Vision and Mission of the Institution and impart the same  values to the students. College and its surrounding shall remain a non-smoking and non-  tobacco/non alcohol/non-drug area. The Institution takes care to protect everyone from any sort of  harm, physical or mental. Anyone found deviating from the same may be terminated from his/her  services.  4.1. Temporary/Part-time Employees on contract  4.1.1. A Temporary Employee is one who is appointed for a limited period of time for a post  which is temporary in nature. They may be part time lecturers/casual labourers  4.1.2. The job description for this category will be the same as for similar posts in the category of  employees in which he/she is, unless otherwise specified, in the letter of appointment.  4.1.3. Temporary employees may not be entitled to regular monthly salaries and allowances as  applicable to other employees. In case of teaching staff, they shall be remunerated as per the  16  number of lectures undertaken along with Travel Allowance or the minimum salary as per the  grade. An agreement shall be made prior to their engagement in the Institution and upon entering  such agreement and employment, the said employees shall be bound by the terms thereof and also  this policy.  4.1.4. They will not be entitled to leave benefits except those days in which the college has an  official holiday. Any leave taken by them will be adjusted with their monthly remuneration (30  days divided by the contract amount).  4.1.5. Those in contract may join the college on probation if the management finds him or her fit  for the Institution with a fresh application for appointment.  4.1.6. Ordinarily the contract is for 11 months. However specified projects can have contracts for  the duration of the project.  4.1.7. They will be paid a consolidated sum on a monthly basis without any other benefits as per  agreement at the time of joining.  4.2. Employees on Probation  4.2.1. An Employee on Probation is one who is appointed for a period of time on probation to a  post or vacancy that is permanent in nature.  4.2.2. The probation starts only if the employee is eligible for the post they are applying for,  failing which he or she may continue on contract. The organisation may terminate the employees  on probation either at the end of one year with one month notice or at the end of second year with  three months notice. Failing to give the notice, one month/two months pay shall be paid to the  employee concerned in accordance with the period of probation mentioned herein above.  4.2.3. The probation period is normally one year. The Governing Body may extend this period for  another year with stated reasons. Notice of extension of probation/termination will be given to the  employee in writing, one month before the end of the probationary period. However the employee  cannot take for granted the continuity of service unless and until it is given in writing by the  Secretary on behalf of the Governing Body.  4.2.4. All probationary employees shall enjoy only medical leave and casual leave benefits and  any other compulsory calendar leave.  4.2.5. If the period of an employee’s probation is extended beyond one year, at the time of  confirmation, the employee will get one annual increment.  17  4.3. Permanent Employees  4.3.1. A Permanent Employee is one who is confirmed as a permanent employee after satisfactory  completion of the probationary period.  4.3.2. This confirmation is to be done in writing. A formal agreement is to be drawn up between  the College, represented by the Secretary / Jt. Secretary on behalf of the Governing Body and the  employee concerned.  4.3.3. The acceptance of the agreement constitutes also an acceptance of the philosophy and  objectives of the College along with its personnel policy and service conditions.  4.3.4. All conditions and benefits listed in this policy are primarily applicable to the permanent  employees, unless their nature indicates otherwise.  4.3.5. A permanent employee may be asked to discontinue his or her service with three months’  notice or pay in lieu thereof for grave reasons. The employee needs to give three months’  notice/three months’ pay if he or she wants to discontinue his or her services in the Institution.  4.3.6. As the employee is free to leave the institution as per conditions mentioned above the  Institution is free to terminate an employee following the above clause.  4.3.7. Regular performance assessment (cfr. College manual pp.135, 835, Edn (a) 5th April 1978)  will be made for every employee. Poor performance can lead to termination as their primary task  is to take care of students’ welfare and progress.  4.3.8. All the publication activities of the employee will be monitored by the research department  of the College. No employee shall publish books or articles without the written sanction of the  competent Authority on submission of manuscript for vetting to the Director, Salesian Research  and Publication Centre.  4.4. Substitute Employees  4.4.1. Substitute employees are those engaged in place of other employees for a particular period  of time.  4.4.2. The payment will be calculated according to the category and qualification of the employee  and a lump sum will be paid according to the number of days the employee has worked or the  lectures undertaken in case of teaching staff.  4.4.3. All dues will be paid on the last day of work or at the time of payment of salaries.  18  4.4.4. They will not be part of any of the College activities except taking the allotted classes. Any  other activity with details of hours and payment will be offered as and when needed.  4.5. Superannuation Collaborators  4.5.1. Volunteers who have retired from different fields may join the college as per their  specialisations.  4.5.2. They will be offered a consolidated sum as honorarium on a weekly/monthly/annual basis  or as per agreement/Annual renewal of contract.  4.5.3. They do not come under the purview of regular employees  4.5.4. The regular procedures of application, submission of documents/credentials and  appointment will be followed.  4.5.5. They may leave the Institution on their personal reasons at any time/the Institution may ask  them to discontinue their services at any time. Either party is not bound to give reasons nor pay  any compensation.  4.6. Special Appointments.  The College may make special appointment for candidates awaiting the minimum required qualification in the concerned subject/department for a maximum of five years. Incase of PhD being the qualification, it will be for a period of 7 years. Such candidates will not be eligible for pay scale prescribed for the concerned department and the decision in this regard will be the discretion of the Governing Body. In the event the candidate fails to get the minimum required qualification within the stipulated time, the said appointment shall stand terminated.  5. CATEGORIES OF STAFF  5.1. Academic Staff  5.1.1. The Academic staff includes all the faculty members involved in teaching including the  Librarian and Registrar. This will also include lecturers who may be non-net qualified as special  appointments for a restricted period of time.  5.1.2. The faculty members will have 6 working hours with lunch break, for 6 days and yearly  180/90x2 (in case of semesters) instruction days; a total of 238 working days for the Institution.  However for the days of Examination/fests/special programmes, the faculty responsible need to  be present till the completion of the programme making sure that students and the institutional  belongings are taken care of.  5.1.3. The Faculty in the different departments shall prepare the students for the examinations  prescribed by the affiliating authority, according to the prescribed syllabus. They shall follow the  19  rules and regulations of the respective departments regarding curriculum, working hours/days and  holidays.  5.1.4. Besides professional competency and effective class-room management, the Lecturer is  expected to be an example to the students by his/her life, in keeping with the ideals of Don  Bosco’s system of education. S/he shall constantly update with reading material and/or available  web resources on Don Bosco: (www.dbway.com).  5.1.5. Faculty members will show great diligence in the preparation of their class, in the delivery  of the lessons, and the correction of assignments given.  5.1.6. They will be responsible for the setting of question-papers and the custody and marking of  answer scripts, with great diligence.  5.1.7. They will be responsible for the proper keeping of the necessary records of the attendance  of students and their progress. The matter shall be reported to the students and their guardians on  a monthly basis.  5.1.8. Faculty members are expected to take part in the co-curricular and other educational  activities of the students by encouraging them and guiding them.  5.1.9. They are required to attend meetings, seminars, up-dating courses or in-service training  organised by the College or for which they are nominated by the College to attend in any other  institution.  5.1.10. They may be asked to be present even on non-working days or in other Colleges in  connection with College-related activities, or to accompany the students.  5.1.11. A Faculty shall not take private tuition for the students of the same College. If anyone is  found to be a defaulter S/he may be terminated from service.  5.1.12. Faculty member should always uphold the name and esteem of the College and of his/her  colleagues. They are bound by confidentiality and secrecy on matters concerning the College and  its inmates.  5.1.13. On days marked compulsory attendance for seminars, workshops, faculty development  programme or any other programmes of the College, absence will lead to deduction in  remuneration unless the person is sick and the same is informed with proper supporting  documents.  5.1.14. Designation of the Academic Staff shall be as follows:  a) Professor: Ph. D with 15 years of experience and academic credentials (UGC API Score)  20  b) Associate Professor: Ph. D with 8 years of experience and academic credentials (UGC)  c) Assistant Professor (category 1): M.A., M.Phil. Net/Set  d) Assistant Professor (category 2): M.A with 55% marks. Net/Set  e) Lecturer (category 3): M.A. with 55% marks appointed on contract only in view of  completion of Net/Set (such candidates cannot be made permanent or presume their  renewal of contract until necessary qualification is procured.)  f) Lecturer (category 4): Those without NET or its equivalent may be appointed in the  department of professional courses; however they will get the NET or its equivalent pay  after five years of experience or counting their experience in the industry/academic  institutions.  5.2. Office and Clerical Staff  5.2.1. Office and clerical staff have the responsibility of taking care of all the documentation,  correspondence and public relation related activities. They are expected to maintain the image of  the College in their dealings with outsiders.  5.2.2. They need to be cordial and available to students, faculty members, parents and all those  who are in anyway associated with the Institution.  5.2.3. They are duty bound to respect confidentiality and not to give any information they possess  to any unauthorised person, inside or outside the College. Any infringement in this matter, if  proved, shall call for dismissal of the person concerned.  5.2.4. The staff members need to go beyond office hours during examinations, admissions and  other college activities.  5.2.5. They are eligible for leave on Sunday/one day per week, 7 casual leaves which needs prior  approval, 7 medical leaves, 30 days of calendar leave including festival days and an earned leave  (14 days). Any leave beyond will be with deduction of pay.  5.2.6. On a regular basis 8 hours of work is expected from every employee for 6 days; a half day  is permitted once a week (on rotation), generally on Saturdays, unless there is a college-function  for which the staff are required to be present.  5.2.7. On special days (admission, college fests, examination days and any other) they will need  to complete the works as per requirement of the occasion.  5.3. Supportive Staff (Non-Academic Staff)  21  5.3.1. These include library and laboratory attendants, drivers, cooks, gardeners, peons, bearers,  darwans, dhobis, sweepers and other maintenance personnel. They form an integral part of the  College and contribute towards the efficiency of the College-work by their regular and watchful  service.  5.3.2. They will be bound by the general rules and the ones stated in 5.2.  6. APPOINTMENT  6.1. The appointing authority for all categories of employees (academic faculty and clerical staff)  other than the Religious in the College, is the Secretary and for the non-academic (supportive)  staff on behalf of the Governing Body, the Joint Secretary.  6.2. No one may consider himself/herself as an employee of the College unless S/he has been  issued the appointment letter duly signed by the Secretary/ Jt. Secretary.  6.3. The date of appointment given on the letter of appointment will be the date considered for all  subsequent requirements.  6.4. Besides one’s own application, the applicant must fill in an application form supplied by the  College with all the details that apply to him/her. The person is duty bound to inform details of  prior engagement and submit the needed clearances.  6.5. If the particulars given in the application are found to be false, the appointment may be  declared invalid.  6.6. The date of birth recorded on the application form and supported by proper certificate (Birth  Certificate, Education Board’s, College Leaving Certificate) cannot be altered and no affidavit  will be accepted.  6.7. A change of name with the change of marital status or otherwise must be intimated with  proper documents.  6.8. A change of address, telephone number or other particulars must likewise be intimated. If the  change of address is not intimated, any communication sent in the given address will be  considered sufficient as notice.  6.9. Once appointed to the College, a permanent employee or an employee on probation cannot  hold or take up another job without the knowledge of the College Authorities. The College  encourages Ph.D and/or further studies. However one may pursue the same only on completion of  a minimum of four semesters. An application for such studies is to be submitted to the appointing  Authority.  22  6.10. An employee of the College cannot use College address or telephone numbers or the status  of being a College staff for any business purposes or contacts other than what is relating to the  College.  7. WORK CULTURE  The work culture shall be cultivated by the spirit of Salesian Presence. It shall be the guiding  principle in all personal and professional relationships with students. The staff members shall  make a genuine effort to maintain a friendly rapport with students. All the activities shall be in an  atmosphere of friendship, cordiality and warmth without affecting the quality of performance. All  the faculty members are expected to be present for the assembly, to be present with their students  and also to get to know the information and departmental communications at the assembly time  7.1. Job Description  7.1.1. Each category of employment has its own job description which is fixed by the department  concerned.  7.1.2. The Principal/Vice Principal or the Head of the Department concerned has the right to ask  each one to perform duties that are in keeping with the category in which one is employed.  7.1.3. While no one is to be asked to do jobs not in consonance with his/her appointment a great  deal of co-operation and mutual assistance is expected of all for the wellbeing of the Institution.  7.1.4. The Service Book of each employee shall be maintained by the College office.  7.2. Working Hours  7.2.1. Working hours for the academic staff will be as per College hours prescribed in the College  Calendar and Handbook. It is expected that every faculty member be in the campus for duration  of 6 hours and the office and support staff for 8 hours on every working day. The teaching  faculty must be in the campus at least ten minutes before the scheduled assembly.  7.2.2. Working days for Non-Academic staff will be from Monday to Saturday.  7.2.3. To suit the smooth and routine running of the College, and because of the specific nature of  the work, individual working hours may be fixed for certain categories of employees. These  timing will be indicated in the letter of appointment or communicated by the person in-charge of  the concerned department.  7.2.4. Use of mobile phone is not permitted during the working hours. Entering a class or any  academic duty with mobile phone is strictly not permitted. Attending to phone calls during/ in the  class is considered misconduct. If the phone is required to be used for any reason, prior  23  permission is to be sought from the competent authority. Habitual non-compliance will call for  disciplinary action.  7.3. Attendance  7.3.1. The attendance register will be maintained for all categories of employees.  7.3.2. All categories of employees will sign the attendance register and also punch in the Biometric system provided, each day at arrival and at departure, indicating the time besides the  record in the biometric system.  7.3.3. Any error in the daily attendance entries must be brought to the notice of the  Principal/Vice-Principal/Registrar/Bursar by the employee concerned on that day itself or on the  following day. No claim can be entertained later.  7.3.4. The Attendance Register supported by the Bio-metric system will be the official record for  all leaves taken or absence, etc...  7.3.5. All are expected to be punctual for duty; habitual late-comers can incur disciplinary action.  7.3.6. With assembly bell, late arrival is marked (7.00 am and 10.00 am SCSC/9.45 am SCS).  7.3.7. Three late arrivals or early departures will be considered one day of leave. If late for any  reason of college assigned work, the permission must be sought in writing from the competent  Authority.  7.4. Absence from Place of Work  7.4.1. During the hours of work (except for the lunch break) all are expected to be in their  respective places of work. During the free periods teachers are expected to be in the staff-room or  in the department room or in the library, attending to their lecturing/scholarly duties.  7.4.2. Any short term leave taken for personal work during class hours will be considered in the  category of early departure/half day leave as per situation assessed by the Competent Authority.  7.4.3. Frequent absence from place of work, or being outside the College premises during hours  of work may call for disciplinary action. “Frequent” here shall mean more than three instances.  Once the staff member has checked-in, s/he shall not leave the campus in between without  authorisation.  7.4.4. The College shall also maintain proper registers as per College rules: Service Book, Daily  Record of Work Book containing daily lesson plans as per the Course plan, work diary and the  Unitization of the Syllabus worked out in consultation with the respective Heads of Departments.  24  7.5. Search  7.5.1. No one should bring unauthorised persons or articles into the College.  7.5.2. Lockers and cupboards used by the employees may be searched if the need arises by  persons authorised by the Principal or Vice Principal, in the presence of the employee. If he/she  refuses to be present, it may be done in the presence of two witnesses.  7.5.3. If situation demands, a search of bags or a personal search may be authorised to the  Security Staff concerned.  7.6. Dress Code  7.6.1. Faculty should dress with decorum, upholding the dignity of their vocation. Formal dress is  to be worn during instruction days.  7.6.2. During working hours non-teaching/supportive staff shall wear uniforms supplied by the  College. They should be clean, properly maintained and well worn.  8. SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES  8.1. The College works out its own salary scheme according to its particular situation and have it  approved by the Founder Body.  8.2. Payment of Salaries  8.2.1. Normally salaries will be paid within the 10th day of the following month.  8.2.2. Salaries will be paid in full after authorised deductions are made, or advances are  recovered.  8.2.3. All required documents for the purpose of income tax or other deductions must be duly  submitted. Non-compliance with these requirements may lead to irregularities in the income-tax  account for which the College cannot be held responsible and the penalty must be borne by the  defaulting employee. Those whose salary is above the income tax exemption limit will have to  submit sufficient documents to avail of further IT exemption, failing which IT will be deducted as  per the IT Act.  8.2.4. While fixing the remuneration of newly appointed faculty, consideration will be made for  their experience provided the person’s contribution is considered significant by the Competent  Authority. Normally every two years of experience in any recognised institutions/industries will  be considered for one increment.  25  8.2.5. For non-teaching staff qualification is to be considered while being appointed and payment  being fixed. A minimum of class ten for Group D is expected as qualification and for office staff,  minimum of graduation. Those with post-graduation may be considered for additional pay as per  responsibility entrusted, provided the degree is seen adding to the quality of work in the  Institution; it is to be assessed by the Competent Authority with due evaluations.  8.2.6. While appointing employees the salary scale is informed to them; everyone will have the  regular increment from the time of probationary appointment. The increment will vary at different  stages and increment will stop after 15 years.  8.3. Provident Fund  Every employee on probation and permanent status is bound to become a member of the  Contributory Provident Fund according to the Provident Fund Rules of the Government of India  and its amendments as far as Colleges may be concerned. However those who have the salary  beyond 15,000/- or such amount so prescribed under the PF Rules need not be part of the PF; the  Institution is not bound to pay the contributory share of such employees, and may discontinue  without notice. However, both deductions may be contributed by the employee.  8.4. Gratuity Every employee who has completed 5 continuous years of service in the College  may be entitled to Gratuity as per rules contained in the Gratuity Act and its amendments as far as  the College is concerned.  8.5. Salary Statement, if requested and required, will be issued each month showing all  allowances and deductions. Any clarification on the salary-slip must be sought within the  following month. Claims made later than one month will not be entertained. In case of need, on a  written request made to the Bursar, the College will issue an Annual salary statement showing the  nature of the employment and the actual salary received by the employee.  8.5.1. If two individuals of the same family (husband and wife) employed, only one is eligible to  receive house rent.  9. LEAVE  9.1. General  9.1.1. Leave means, authorised absence from work.  9.1.2. Leave is to be sanctioned and/or authorised according to the exigencies of the proper and  regular running of the College against leave application in the prescribed form. Such application  cannot be allowed and/or authorised and/or sanctioned if it disturbs such proper and regular  running of the College.  26  9.1.3. The Governing Body of the Institution is the competent authority to sanction any leave  other than casual leave.  9.1.4. For the purpose of leave, the year will be the College Calendar year.  9.1.5. Taking leave without sanction, and extending leave without sanction, are considered acts of  misconduct and shall result in deduction in salary and disciplinary action  9.1.6. Leave rules are primarily applicable to the permanent employees; they may apply to  employees in probation and others if and as specified in the letter of appointment.  9.1.7. A leave-register for every employee shall be maintained in the Registrar's office.  9.1.8. Any leave that has been properly applied for and granted by the lawful authority will not  cause a break in the service of the concerned staff member. The leave sanction will specify the  nature and the conditions of break in service and PF.  9.1.9 During examination days leaves are not generally granted except in some extreme cases of  necessity for which prior sanction must be obtained by the employee from Principal/Vice-  Principal with the relevant documents.  9.2. Casual Leave  9.2.1. All probationary and permanent employees are entitled to 7 days of casual leave.  9.2.2. Casual leave is not a matter of right; it has to be sanctioned prior to the day of leave. Only  one staff member in each department can take the casual leave on a given day as the students will  otherwise suffer. Hence the faculty needs to make necessary adjustments to take care of the  students.  9.2.3. Casual leave may be affixed or prefixed to any holiday or Sunday but the total period  including the holiday or Sunday shall not exceed 5 days at a time. Sundays and holidays falling  within the period of casual leave shall not be counted as part of the casual leave. Casual leave  shall not be affixed or prefixed to any long vacations.  9.2.4. Temporary employees/employees on contract after three months of service may get a  proportionate number of days for casual leave.  9.3. Medical Leave  9.3.1. 7 days medical leave is permitted to all permanent employees during the course of the year.  A medical certificate is to accompany the leave application for any leave beyond two days.  9.4. Maternity Leave  27  9.4.1. Female employees with permanent appointment are entitled to maternity leave for four  months with full salary and allowances.  9.4.2. In calculating four months, calendar months are taken into account and all holidays  occurring in those months are included in and as such maternity.  9.4.3. Notice of maternity leave should be given at least one month prior to the leave.  9.4.4. Maternity Leave is to be taken at least two weeks prior to confinement.  9.5. Annual Leave  9.5.1. All non-teaching employees with permanent appointment are entitled to 14 days earned  leave besides the allotted calendar holidays with pay and allowances within the year, provided  they have completed eleven months of service in the College.  9.5.2. Non-teaching staff may take the annual leave together or in two/three broken periods, but  only within the period of College holidays. Those who have not completed eleven months service  at the time of the College holidays, may be given proportionate leave.  9.5.3. Annual leave (earned 14 days leave) is to be sanctioned after taking into account the  essential services in the College.  9.5.4. Annual holidays can be availed in parts during the long study leave, puja holidays or  Christmas holidays with prior written permission obtained well in advance. All non-teaching staff  in a department cannot be given long holidays at the same time, as their services are required for  running the College smoothly.  9.6. Public Holidays  9.6.1. Generally all College holidays are holidays for the teaching staff while not so for non-  academic staff. Teaching staff can be asked to attend special classes for students, updating  courses, in-service training or other College related activities during such holidays.  9.6.2. The non-academic staff will follow a list of holidays published annually by the College for  them.  9.6.3. Due to the nature of their work, for those who cannot avail of the full day a week and other  public holidays, other compensatory arrangements may be made.  9.7. Study Leave  9.7.1. Study leave with benefits is permitted only for those with the status of permanent  appointment.  28  9.7.2. With the prior sanction of the Governing Body, a study leave not exceeding 10 days may be  sanctioned to faculty members who are appearing for an examination to further their qualification.  9.7.3. The same may be extended to the non-teaching staff for an examination, sanctioned by the  College, which will enhance the individual’s performance or general proficiency.  9.8. Special Leave  9.8.1. Special leave without pay for advanced study or foreign travel or other purposes can be  permitted by the Governing Body to permanent employees who have completed 10 years of  service in the College.  9.8.2. The maximum period of this special leave is one year and is permitted only once during  their service in College.  9.8.3. These leaves (study leave and special leave) will have to be applied for, at least three  months in advance and must be approved by the Governing Body.  9.8.4. Non-class days specially study leave for students or non class days due to special situation  like public strike etc. can be availed for academic progress when the college does not have  specific work assigned; however a detailed report must be submitted on joining back and the fruit  of the study will be the intellectual property of the college for its publication or academic  requirement as the work is done while on duty; the person concerned gets the authorship and it  may be published by the individual with due permissions from the college.  9.8.5. Attending seminars, foreign travels, taking up responsibilities/jobs of a public nature  without written permission is considered a misconduct.  9.8.6. A staff member on special leave shall not be entitled to increment if the same falls due at  the time when S/he is enjoying the special leave.  9.8.7. Leave without pay may be sanctioned in special situations as per request of the individual  and the need of the college assessed by the Governing Body; however making the clarifications  regarding benefits of increment, gratuity, PF or any other.  9.8.8. A register for the leave account of every employee shall be maintained in the Registrar's  office.  10. SUPERANNUATION/TERMINATION OF SERVICE  10.1. The retiring age for academic staff is 62 years and for clerical and non-academic staff is 60  years.  29  10.2. A permanent employee may resign from the service of the College with three months’ prior  notice or payment of three month's salary amount to the college,  10.3. Governing Body may terminate the service of a permanent employee by giving three  months’ prior notice or three months’ salary in lieu of notice. Here salary shall mean the basic  pay.  10.4. A temporary or probationary employee may resign or his/her services may be terminated by  giving one month’s prior notice or one months’ salary in lieu of such notice, without assigning  any reason whatsoever.  10.5. An employee convicted by a court-of-law on a criminal charge will be terminated without  notice or salary in lieu of notice. An employee against whom a criminal case is registered will not  be allowed to continue in the service of the College till acquitted. If acquitted the period will be  considered part of service, but no salary will be paid for the period, unless the case was registered  by the College itself.  10.6. An employee may be deemed to have terminated his/her services with the College by way  of voluntary abandonment of service if s/he without any intimation /or without any sanction from  the Competent College authority, does not report for duty at his/her place of work for a period of  fifteen (15) continuous calendar days. In the event of such voluntary abandonment of services by  an employee, the College shall be at liberty to take such action as it may deem necessary for  breach of the conditions of service against such an employee.  10.7. On resignation or termination, all dues to the employees, upon any recovery to be made by  the College, will be cleared within seven days after the resignation or termination becomes  effective. This, however, does not apply to the Provident Fund, which are realised when these  amounts are disbursed by the Competent Authority.  10.8. Permanent and probationary employees, on leaving the service of the College are entitled to  a certificate of service as well as a certificate of release from duty.  10.9. Return of College Property: Before leaving the service of the College, an employee shall  return to the College in good order and condition, all properties or equipments including  documents, papers, and files belonging to the College. The cost of any equipment or property not  safely returned shall be deductible from the employee’s salary or other amounts due to her/him on  any account or shall be recoverable otherwise, and the employee shall be responsible for all costs  and consequences thereof.  30  10.10. If any employee is in occupation of any residential premises provided by the College,  whether College owned, arranged or leased, shall immediately upon termination of his  employment with the College, hand over to the College the vacant possession of the premises. If  not it may be recovered by any process of eviction considered appropriate in such circumstances  by the management. The final clearances of dues shall be settled only once the matter is settled.  11. MISCONDUCT  11.1. General  11.1.1. Misconduct is a wilful action or omission on the part of an employee which goes against  the objectives and interests or requirements of the College community.  11.1.2. These acts or omissions could be summed up under the following list which is illustrative  and not exhaustive.  a) Neglect of duty by way of sleeping on duty, or lax behaviour and attitude towards time.  b) Want of diligence in the performance of duty, or violation of the orders of the lawful authority.  c) Irregularity in attendance, taking leave without sanction.  d) Insubordination  e) Moral delinquency affecting the discipline, moral standards and reputation of the College.  f) Theft or causing damage to property, fraud  g) Going on strike or instigating to strike  h) Holding any meeting, distributing handbills, notices, leaflets, booklets, pamphlets, posters in  the College premises without prior written permission from the competent authority.  i) Using indecent language or making false allegations.  j) Unauthorised collection of money, carrying on any kind of business in the College premises.  k) Coming to work in a state of drunkenness or getting drunk during the period of work; being  under the influence of drugs.  l) Violation of confidentiality or giving information to unauthorised persons.  m) Non-acceptance of a College notice at the registered address of the employee.  n) Inflicting corporal punishment on students.  31  o) Any other act or omission that in general understanding would be detrimental to the objectives  of the College.  p) Smoking/consumption of alcohol or any addictive substance within the premises or vicinity of  the establishment or just prior to resumption of duty;  q) Not submitting the regular (weekly, monthly, bi-annual/annual) record or works and reports  about students  11.1.3. The College has the right to impose penalties or call for disciplinary action after assessing  the gravity of misconduct.  11.2. Penalties  11.2.1. Minor penalties may include Censure, or Recovery of damage or loss incurred by the  College from the individual, or Suspension from duty without pay for a period not exceeding  seven days.  11.2.2. Major penalties may consist of (a) Withholding of increment (b) Compulsory termination  of service (c) Dismissal. The application of the above penalties shall be decided by the Competent  Authority.  11.3. Disciplinary Authorities  11.3.1. The Secretary on behalf of the Governing Body, shall be the Disciplinary Authority in  respect of all acts of misconduct which warrant only minor penalties as defined above. He shall  refer all actions proposed to be taken, to the Governing Body, and the Governing Body shall  advise the Secretary as to the action to be taken against the delinquent staff/faculty member.  11.3.2. The Governing Body shall appoint a Disciplinary Committee consisting of Principal/Vice  Principal/HoD/Non-teaching staff and a Lady Faculty Member in respect of all cases of  misconduct, which warrant imposition of a major penalty as defined above. The Disciplinary  Committee shall act also through the Grievance Redressal Cell in ordinary and extra ordinary  matters of complaints concerning the staff. The Grievance Redressal Cell consists of 2 senior lay  staff, one being a lady, one senior religious staff and a nominee of the appellate Founder Body.  11.3.3. The Founder Body shall be the Appellate Tribunal in respect of all cases where a major  penalty is sought to be imposed against a member of the staff. The Founder Body shall have the  power to reconsider all the evidence produced in the case, admit fresh evidence, if necessary, hear  the parties concerned and confirm, modify or set aside any decision of the Governing Body. In  which case:  32  11.3.4. The Founder Body shall appoint an Investigative Team consisting of:  a) One representative of the Governing Body.  b) One representative of the aggrieved staff member.  c) One person not connected with either of the two above mentioned categories of whom one  shall be a lady member, to be appointed by the Founder Body, preferably a person having  discharged magisterial or judicial functions or who has been engaged in Civil Service, who will  also act as Chairman of the Investigative Team. The decision of Investigative Team will be  considered by the Founder Body by vote and shall be final in regard to the imposition of major  penalties.  11.4. Procedure for Imposing Minor Penalties  11.4.1. No order imposing any of the minor penalties specified above shall be imposed except  after: a) The staff member has been informed in writing by the Secretary/Jt. Secretary of the  College of the action proposed to be taken against him/her. The letter to be sent by the  Secretary/Jt. Secretary of the College will be accompanied by allegations on the basis of which  action is proposed to be taken. The concerned staff member will have to make his/her  representation to the Secretary/Jt. Secretary of the College against the action proposed to be taken,  within one week from the date of receipt of the notice from the Secretary/Jt. Secretary of the  College and s/he shall also intimate as to whether s/he wishes to be personally heard in respect of  the allegations against him/her. b) The Secretary/Jt. Secretary has considered the representation,  if any, of the concerned member of the staff, and has granted him/her a hearing, if so desired. c)  The Secretary/Jt. Secretary has, thereafter, submitted a report to the Governing Body.  11.4.2. The Governing Body shall consider the report submitted by the Secretary/Jt. Secretary in  connection with the case, and shall advise him concerning the penalty proposed to be imposed on  the concerned member of the staff.  11.4.3. The Secretary/Jt. Secretary shall proceed to impose such penalty as he may be advised by  the Governing Body. The staff member thus penalised, however, is free to appeal to the Founder  Body as provided earlier. The decision of the Governing Body shall be final in respect to Minor  Penalties.  11.5. Procedure for Imposing Major Penalties  11.5.1. No order imposing on a staff /employee any of the major penalties specified herein except  after holding an enquiry in the manner hereby prescribed.  33  11.5.2. The Secretary shall submit a report to the Governing Body in case of serious misconduct  by a member of the faculty/staff/employee which may warrant the imposition of a major penalty  or penalties, specified above. On consideration of the said report, the Governing Body may direct  the Secretary/Jt. Secretary to issue a charge-sheet to the concerned member of the staff/employee.  In such case, the Governing Body shall appoint an Investigation Team to conduct the enquiry  against the delinquent.  11.5.3. The staff / employee shall be supplied with a copy of the charge-sheet or/and charges  together with a statement of the allegation on which they are based.  11.5.4. S/he will be required to submit to the Secretary of the Governing Body within seven days  of the receipt of the charges and allegations, a written statement in his/her defence and also state  whether s/he desires to be heard in person.  11.5.5. The Investigation Team will conduct the Enquiry considering the charge-sheet and written  statement of the staff/employee, if any, and giving him/her a hearing, if so desired.  11.5.6. The Investigation Team will prepare a Report on the Enquiry with their findings on each  of the charges together with reasons and he/she will send the Report to the Secretary/Jt. Secretary  of the Governing Body.  11.5.7. The Governing Body will be at liberty to either accept or reject the Report and may order  a fresh Enquiry on either the full or partial aspect of the charges.  11.5.8. The Governing Body will take steps as are considered fit and proper on the basis of the  findings of the Investigation Team. If a penalty is to be imposed, the staff /employee may be  called upon by the Governing Body to show cause within 10 days concerning the quantum of the  penalty.  11.5.9. On receiving the cause shown, if any, or after 10 days from the second show cause notice  served to the concerned staff/employee, the Governing Body will proceed to impose such  penalties, as it thinks fit. The staff/employee thus penalised may, however, prefer an appeal  against such order of penalty in the manner provided below. During this process, if the act was a  public scandal, the defaulter may be kept under suspension from duties.  11.6. Appeal  11.6.1. Appellate Tribunal - Founder Body  a) A Staff/Faculty/employee against whom an order proposing to impose any of the penalties  referred to above has been passed, may prefer an appeal to the Founder Body within 15 days of  34  the date of the receipt of such order. During the period of 15 days, the penalty proposed to be  imposed shall be kept in abeyance, and if an appeal is preferred, the penalty proposed to be  imposed shall remain in abeyance till the disposal of the appeal.  b) After considering all aspects of the case, including the submission made by the concerned staff  member, the Governing Body and the Investigation Team, the Founder Body as the Final  Appellate Tribunal shall pass such orders as it thinks fit and proper and its decision shall be final.  11.6.2. Final Appellate Tribunal  a) If by reason of any decision of the Founder Body, acting as Appellate Tribunal, a staff member  is subjected to any of the major penalties specified herein, s/he shall have the right to prefer a  further appeal to the Final Appellate Tribunal.  b) Any such appeal must be filed with the Final Appellate Tribunal, through the Secretary of the  College within 15 days of the date on which a copy of the order of the Appellate Tribunal is  communicated to the member. During the period of 15 days, the penalty proposed to be imposed  shall be kept in abeyance, and if any appeal is preferred, the penalty proposed to be imposed shall  remain in abeyance till the disposal of the appeal.  c) The Final Appellate Tribunal may on application made in this regard, call for the records of the  case from the Founder Body, the Governing Body, the Secretary of the College and shall also  afford an opportunity of hearing to the concerned staff /employee.  d) After considering all aspects of the case, including the submission made by the concerned staff  member, and the Investigation Team, the Founder Body as the Final Appellate Tribunal shall pass  such orders as it thinks fit and its decision shall be final.  11.7. Bar on Representation by Legal Practitioners  11.7.1. No legal practitioner shall be allowed to represent either a staff /faculty/employee or the  Governing Body of the College in the disciplinary and appellate proceedings as described above.  11.7.2. The representation shall be made by the person concerned and the authorized  representative of the Governing Body.  11.8. Suspension  11.8.1. The Secretary of the College may, in cases involving gross misconduct, indiscipline or  negligence of duties, place a staff/employee under suspension pending further action by the  35  Governing Body and the same must confirm or annul the action taken by the Secretary, within 15  days.  11.8.2. The Secretary of the College, on the instruction of the Governing Body, shall place a  staff/employee of the College under suspension in the following cases:  a) Where an Enquiry against him/her is contemplated or where such an Enquiry is pending.  b) Or, where a case against him/her in respect of any criminal offence involving turpitude is under  investigation or on trial.  c) Any form of publicity that goes against the institution in media or in any other mode.  d) Any injury done to students: physical, moral or emotional.  e) Such suspension as provided here shall not be construed as a penalty as indicated elsewhere in  this document.  11.8.3. Every order of suspension shall be reported, for information only to the competent  Government/University Authority.  11.8.4. A staff/faculty/employee placed under suspension shall be entitled to receive from the  College a monthly subsistence allowance in the following manner:  a) During the first two months of the period of suspension at the rate of fifty percent of his/her  total emoluments.  b) If there is a delay on the part of Governing Body beyond two months in arriving at a decision,  the subsistence allowance will continue to be paid at the rate of seventy five percent of his/her  total emoluments until the Governing Body of the Institute communicates its decision to the  staff/employee concerned.  c) If the member takes up any other paid employment during the period of suspension, s/he shall  not be entitled to any subsistence allowance for the period he/she is thus otherwise employed.  d) If the staff/faculty/employee is exonerated from all charges, all arrears of pay and allowances  will be paid to him/her for the total period of suspension, after adjustment of the subsistence  allowance paid.  11.9. Grievances  11.9.1. A grievance is a genuine complaint an employee may have against the college with regard  to the work or benefits due to him/her.  36  11.9.2. A grievance is to be presented in writing to the grievance redressal cell; if the matter needs  further consideration, the same shall be forwarded to the Governing Body who will recommend  the action to be taken.  11.9.3. If the action proposed or taken is not satisfactory to the aggrieved employee an appeal  may be made by him/her to the Founder Body.  11.9.4. The Founder Body shall appoint a committee with due legal consultations and the decision  of the Body shall be binding to settle the matter.  CONCLUSION  This Personnel Policy is approved by the Founder Body, which reserves to itself the right to  amend, add to it or delete any clause included in it. From time to time, the Governing Body will  discuss the working of this policy and recommend modifications to the Founder Body. Ordinarily  the Secretary/Jt. Secretary/Principal/ Rector are the interpreters of this policy. They may, if  necessary, suspend the operation of any particular clause, but must give a written explanation to  the Governing Body for their action. Their order will become operative unless the Governing  Body overrules it. The Founder Body in its annual inspection assesses the practical impact of the  policy and may make amendment as and when needed. A copy of this policy will be available on  the College website: (www.salesiancollege.net) / (www.salesiancollege.in).  37