Volume I APPEAL Training Materials for Continuing Education Personnel (ATLP-CE) CONTINUING EDUCATION : NEW POLICIES AND DIRECTIONS DESDE UNESCO PRINCIPAL REGIONAL OFFICE FOR ASIA AND THE PACIFIC SANO BOTTIDICATA WHITTIMET WA UNESCO. Principal Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific. APPEAL training materials for continuing education personnel (ATLP-CE) Vol. I Continuing education: new policies and directions. Bangkok, 1993. 108 p. (Asia-Pacific Programme of Education for All) 1. LITERACY PROGRAMMES ASIA/PACIFIC. 2. UNIVERSAL EDUCATION ASIA/PACIFIC. 3. BASIC EDUCATION ASIA/PACIFIC. 4. CONTINUING EDUCATION ASIA/PACIFIC. I. Title. II. Series. 379.24 APPEAL Training Materials for Continuing Education Personnel (ATLP-CE) Volume I CONTINUING EDUCATION: NEW POLICIES AND DIRECTIONS UNESCO PRINCIPAL REGIONAL OFFICE FOR ASIAAND THE PACIFIC Bangkok, 1993 © UNESCO 1993 Published by the UNESCO Principal Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific P.O. Box 967, Prakanong Post Office Bangkok 10110, Thailand Printed in Thailand The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout the publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning its frontiers or boundaries. C O N T E N T S Page FOREWORD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . i INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ii Chapter 1 : The Context of Continuing Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 Chapter 2 : The Relationship Between Formal Education and Continuing Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 Chapter 3 : The Present Status of Continuing Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 Chapter 4 : ATLP-CE: Its Origin, Scope and Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 Chapter 5 : An Infrastructure for Continuing Education with Special Reference to learning Centres . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37 Chapter 6 : Strategies for Implementing Continuing Education Programmes Administrative Aspects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53 Chapter 7 : Clientele, Delivery Systems and Learning Resources for Continuing Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65 Chapter 8 : Guidelines for Setting Up or S t rengthening Continuing Education Programmes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75 Chapter 9 : ATraining Curriculum for Continuing Education Personnel . . . . . . 85 Annex : List of Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107 F O R E W O R D Asia-Pacific Programme of Education for All (APPEAL) was launched in 1987 by UNESCO with the aims of promoting literacy and basic learning skills through three programmes, i.e. 1) Eradication of Illiteracy (EOI), 2) Universalization of Primary Education (UPE) and 3) Continuing Education for Development (CED). The concept of basic education programme was reinforced and expanded by the World Declaration on Education for All adopted by the Jomtien Conference held in 1990. This expanded vision of education will help the people firstly to acquire survival life skills through pre-school education, primary education and functional literacy programmes. Secondly to acquire knowledge and skills to improve their quality of life, and attitude and habit of lifelong learning through continuing education programmes. The world is going through a process of change which is unprecedented in its magnitude and implication. This phenomenon is specially noticeable in the Asia-Pacific Region where the progress is much faster and implications are far more profound. APPEAL has made a survey of continuing education programmes in various countries. The survey revealed that the countries were organizing continuing education programmes under different names such as post-literacy, adult education, non-formal education, etc. The Second Meeting for Regional Co-ordination of APPEAL (Bangkok, 1990) decided to classify continuing education into six categories, they are (1) Post-Literacy Programmes (PLP), (2) Equivalency Programme (EP), (3) Quality of Life Improvement Programme (QLIP), (4) Income-Generating Programme (IGP), (5) Individual Interest Promotion Programme (IIP), and (6) Future Oriented Programme (FOP). Following the decision UNESCO/PROAP developed following manuals under the general title of APPEAL Training Materials for Continuing Education Personnel (ATLP-CE) ATLP-CE Volume I : Continuing Education: New Policies and Directions ATLP-CE Volume II : Post-Literacy Programmes (PLP) ATLP-CE Volume III : Equivalency Programmes (EP) ATLP-CE Volume IV : Quality of Life Improvement Programmes (QLIP) ATLP-CE Volume V : Income-Generating Programmes (IGP) ATLP-CE Volume VI : Individual Interest Promotion Programmes (IIP) ATLP-CE Volume VII : Future-Oriented Programmes(FOP) ATLP-CE Volume VIII : Learning Centre Development Programmes These volumes have been conceived, developed and written by the experts on continuing education in the countries in the region. Therefore, they have combined theory and practice into i suitable manuals and made them flexible so that each country can adopt and adapt them according to the situation and needs. These volumes are designed to act as source material for launching continuing education programmes. UNESCO/PROAP hope that each country will develop its own system of continuing education. A number of Regional and Sub-Regional Workshops are planned to train key personnel who would be working for continuing education in their countries. ATLP-CE will provide basic materials for such workshops. I hope the countries will also use them in their national workshops. In the end I would like to express UNESCO’s grateful thanks to all the experts who have contributed to conceptualise, develop and write ATLP-CE. I would like to request all the experts of continuing education to make suggestion to improve the series continuously. I firmly believe that in this ever changing panorama practitioners of education should not be silent spectators but the main actors to induce the change in the right direction. Hedayat Ahmed Director, UNESCO/PROAP ii I N T R O D U C T I O N Asia-Pacific Programme of Education for All (APPEAL) has the following Action Areas : 1. Universalization of Primary Education (UPE) 2. Eradication of Illiteracy (EOI) 3. Continuing Education for Development (CED) UNESCO Principal Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific (PROAP) has been working very closely with the Member States to expand and improve Primary Education and Literacy Programmes. Specifically APPEAL Training Materials for Literacy Personnel (ATLP) has helped improve the quality of curriculum, learning materials and training for literacy programmes in Asia and the Pacific. Based on the experiences of ATLP, UNESCO/PROAP is developing APPEAL Training Materials for Continuing Education Personnel (ATLP-CE). It organized a Planning Meeting on 16-20 April 1990 in Hua Hin, Thailand, and developed the First Volume of ATLP-CE entitled: «Continuing Education: New Policies and Directions.» The Planning Meeting prepared guidelines for the preparation of training manuals for the following six types of Continuing Education Programmes: 1. Post-Literacy Programmes 2. Equivalency Programmes 3. Quality of Life Improvement Programmes 4. Income-Generating Programmes 5. Individual Interest Promotion Programmes 6. Future-Oriented Programmes UNESCO/PROAP has convened a series of Technical Working Group Meetings of Experts and developed eight volumes of ATLP-CE. This book is the first in the set. ATLP-CE is an extension of the twelve volumes set of APPEAL Training Materials for Literacy Personnel (ATLP) and it is recommended that readers be reasonably familiar with the series before reading this volume. This first volume gives a general overview of continuing education and describes the scope and development of ATLP-CE. Under ATLP-CE continuing education is defined very broadly as the provision of opportunities for lifelong learning. In the long run continuing education should be seen as the mechanism for establishing a learning society. The concept of a learning society as defined by UNESCO implies that education is a function of all agencies of society, not just those which traditionally have been given a primarily educational role such as iii schools and colleges. Continuing Education, therefore promotes lifelong learning everywhere in the society through formal and non-formal channels and through informal learning. The point is stressed that continuing education is the means by which human resource development can occur and hence how socio-economic development can be based on a knowledgeable, skilled and self reliant citizenry. It is argued that an effective continuing education system should be organized in relation to overall national development plans. An effective infrastructure needs to be established, personnel should be trained and effective delivery systems developed. Entry points into continuing education should be available for all citizens. The provision of opportunities for lifelong learning, that is the availability of continuing education, should be freely open to all. The range of continuing education providers needs to be very broad to cater for the types of learning required by all citizens. In a developing country there is probably need for a very obvious entry point into such a complex and diverse system and the emergence of local learning centres is proposed to satisfy that need. This volume also comments on the types of continuing education activities appropriate for the present stage of development of the Region and provides some broad guidelines for their design and implementation. T.M. SAKYA Co-ordinator «APPEAL» iv Chapter 1 THE CONTEXT OF CONTINUING EDUCAT I O N A. The Learning Society and Lifelong Learning As most countries of Asia and the Pacific move towards universal basic literacy they are challenged by a most significant further step in development. This is their emergence as learning societies. The idea of a learning society was first advanced by UNESCO almost twenty years ago in its famous report Learning to Be.1 According to this UNESCO Report, a learning society is one in which all agencies of a society are educational providers, not just those whose primary responsibility is education (e.g. schools). For example while the primary responsibility of a factory is not education but the manufacture of goods it can and should have an educational role as well. It can provide training for its employees and also can educate the general public about its processes and products, its environmental policies and its societal contributions. Another aspect of a learning society is that all citizens should be engaged in learning, taking full advantage of the opportunities provided by the learning society. At the time that this idea was first formulated it made very little impact on education in the Third World as most developing countries considered it to be an unattainable ideal, at least in their foreseeable future. They concentrated instead on the development of formal education, especially on the achievement of Universal Primary Education. That attitude has now changed. Many countries with low levels of basic literacy in the 1970s have now attained more than 80 per cent adult literacy and many have almost achieved universal literacy. Many countries which twenty years ago were economically disadvantaged have become Newly Industrialized Countries (NICs). The idea of a learning society no longer seems to be an unrealistic ideal but a real possibility and a goal for planned development. If there is a genuine learning society then all citizens engage in education from birth to death education is lifelong. Purposive, self-planned and self-initiated learning becomes central to the lives of all adults. Each individual sets a series of learning objectives and then pursues these by any means available through the many agencies provided by the learning society. As citizens become more aware of the power and significance of education as an agency for improving their lives they tend to plan out longer term learning goals and to «add in» shorter term learning experiences to meet immediate needs. Lifelong planning involving continuous education and training is undertaken by all. In this situation however, education must be seen to be something much broader and more significant than «schooling» alone. As needs arise adults can draw on programmes offered by formal education, non formal education and informal education as these sub-sectors are traditionally defined. Some of this learning may be highly * Faure, Edgar et al Learning to Be: The World of Education Today and Tomorrow, Paris, UNESCO, 1972. 1 structured through attendance at a formal course of study, some may be relatively unstructured, through working in casual learning groups or by independent study; some may be through programmes offered by Departments of Non-Formal Education which aim to provide formal qualifications by alternative non formal means; other forms of learning may be provided by employers through in-house or on the job training and retraining; and so on. Learning needs change as adults take on new roles, and as they get older education tends to be less structured and to draw more and more on informal opportunities for learning. B. Continuing Education and Lifelong Learning Under APPEAL, the UNESCO Sub-Regional Seminar on Continuing Education held in Canberra, Australia, in November 1987, defined continuing education as a «broad concept which includes all of the learning opportunities all people want or need outside of basic literacy education and primary education». This definition implies the following: i) Continuing education is for literate youth and adults ii) It is responsive to needs and wants iii) It can include experiences provided by the formal, non-formal and informal education sub-sectors iv) It is defined in terms of «opportunity» to engage in lifelong learning after the conclusion of primary schooling or its equivalent. The relationship between lifelong learning and continuing education, therefore, can be shown by a simple diagram (Figure 1.1). In this diagram the central columns show how educational programmes can be planned and sequenced by an individual throughout life. These programmes may be from the formal, non-formal or informal sub-sectors of education and continuing education is the opportunity provided by the learning society to engage in the learning. 2 INDIVIDUALLIFELINE EDUCATION LIFELONG EDUCATIONAL «SYSTEM» PROJECTS PROGRAMMES Figure 1.1: The relationship between liflong learning and continuing education. The bands represent individual learning projects. C. Systems of Education The terms «formal» and «non formal» and informal» are defined by various educators and educational systems in different ways and there is some confusion and overlap between these ideas and the concept of continuing education. Under APPEAL, therefore, it is proposed to use the term formal to apply to programmes offered by established educational institutions such as schools, technical colleges and universities and to use the term non-formal for courses and programmes offered outside the formal system. The term informal education is more controversial. Some Member States may prefer not to use this term at this stage of their educational development yet it is at the heart of the concept of continuing education. It should not be confused with the term «informal learning» which occurs incidentally and casually from 3 day-to-day observation and experience. All education is purposive and has same degree Of structure. The term «informal education», therefore, refers to educational programmes initiated, and organized by individual learners who set and pursue in a structured way, the achievement of specific objectives independently of any system or agency, either formal or non-formal. Incidentally, one of the key aims of continuing education is to promote and foster informal learning so that adults are empowered to structure and pursue any educational project that they may wish to undertake without being dependent on courses or programmes formal or non-formal, provided by systems or institutions. This type of approach to the three terms avoids confusion between the concepts of «non formal education» and «continuing education» and allows continuing education to be pursued formally, non-formally or by informal self learning according to need. It makes it clear that continuing education and non-formal education are NOT the same thing, but that continuing education can draw on both formal and non-formal education. In many countries, however, it must be recognized that there are government ministries or departments with the title «Department of Non-Formal Education» and these are usually responsible for all those aspects of continuing adult education which occur outside the formal education system. Most, however, give greatest emphasis to equivalency programmes which provide formal qualifications by alternative means. Making the term non-formal education equivalent to the concept «continuing education» as a whole, has created another problem. Because historically most Departments of Non-formal Education in Asia and the Pacific have been concerned mainly with Equivalency Programmes, there has been a tendency neglect other types of life-long learning. It is vitally important for Member States to broaden their concept of continuing education to involve the many objectives and approaches advocated hi these volumes, and especially to promote informal education. A more helpful approach would be to identify Departments of Continuing Education which would have equivalency type programmes as only one of their responsibilities. The problem in terminology partly arises because of the traditionally narrow definition of «education» as meaning formal education alone. This narrow view has also resulted in an over emphasis on formal schooling and the relative neglect of non-formal and self learning approaches. This imbalance has created many problems and in most developing countries formal schooling has not lived up to its expectations as the main mechanism far socio-economic development. Formal education tends to be selective. elitist, academic in orientation and largely irrelevant to real needs. Because traditional formal education is urban in orientation it has encouraged a drift to the cities and there has been a denial of the best traditional values. Also in spite of the fact that for most people formal education represents only about 20 per cent of lifelong education, it absorbs more than 90 per cent of the educational budget. Member States are now recognizing that socio-economic planning alone is not enough and that human resource development is a key enabling factor in development. Human resource development is viewed by UNDP as «the process of enlarging peoples choices». People should lead long and healthy lives, be well educated and have access to resources needed for a decent standard of living. UNDP has now created a new «development index» an Index of Human Development (the HDI) to go together with the traditional index of Gross National Product 4 (GNP). Countries can now be classified as having low, medium or high HDI. The indicators for HDI include life expectancy, adult literacy level and purchasing power. This new index focuses on how human wellbeing translates into economic growth and vice versa. What has not yet been fully appreciated however by many Member States is that human resource development and lifelong learning are the same thing. What is urgently needed now is a broader view of education that has formal schooling as only a small component of life planning and that even the provision of equivalency programmes is not enough. Since continuing education is the opportunity to engage in lifelong learning, continuing education must now emerge as the main component of this broader view of education as a whole. (see figure 1.2). N A R R O W V I E W OFEDUCATION Figure 1.2: A Changing View of Education Continuing education programmes provide an opportunity for all citizens to truly integrate learning, working and living. These three aspects of personal development must grow together so that overdo quality of life improves and so that society as a whole becomes truly an «educated» society in the best meaning of the term. D. Types of Continuing Education Programmes Apart from defining continuing education the UNESCO Seminar «Continuing Education in the Context of APPEAL» held in Cangerra, Australia, in November 1987 devised a system of classifying types of continuing education programmes into six categories according to their aims. This classification was slightly amended at the First Meeting for Regional Co-ordination of APPEAL held in Bangkok, Thailand, 14-18 November 1988.1 The definitions expressed in terms of programme aims, have been further refined in the various UNESCO workshops which drafted the volumes in the ATLP-CE series. l See Final Report of this meeting published by UNESCO/PROAP, Bangkok in 1989, page 27. 5 BROAD VIEWOFEDUCATION SCHOOLINGALONE A SMALL PART OFLIFE CHANGES SCHOOLING ASONLY TO ONEOPTIONAMONGMANY LIFELONGLEARNING The six types of continuing education programmes are listed and defined below (see box). TYPE 1 POST-LITERACY PROGRAMMES (PLPs). These aim to maintain and enhance basic literacy, numeracy and problem solving skills, giving individuals sufficient general basic work skills enabling them to function effectively in their societies. TYPE 2 EQUIVALENCY PROGRAMMES (EPs). These are designed as alternative education programmes equivalent to existing formal general or vocational education.TYPE 3 I N C O M E G E N E R ATING PROGRAMMES (IGPs). These help participants acquires or upgrade vocational skills and enable them to conduct incomegenerating activities. IGPs are those vocational continuing education programmes delivered in a variety of contexts and which are directed in particular towards those people who are currently not self-sufficient in a modern world, that is those persons at or below the poverty line. TYPE 4 Q U A L I T Y O F LIFE IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMMES (QLIPs). These aim to equip learners and the community with that essential knowledge, attitudes, values and skills to enable them to improve quality of life as individuals and as members of the community.TYPE 5 I N D I V I D U A L I N T E R E S T PROMOTION PROGRAMMES (IIPs). These provide opportunity for individuals to participate in and learn about their chosen social. cultural, spiritual, health, physical and artistic interests. TYPE 6 FUTURE ORIENTED (FOs) PROGRAMMES. These give workers, professionals, regional and national community leaders, villagers, businessmen and planners new skills, knowledge and techniques to adapt themselves and their organisations to growing social and technological changes. Volumes II to VII of ATLP-CE deal with each of these types in turn. It is recommend that all readers study volume I on General Principles of Continuing Education and Volume VIII on Learning Centres together with the one or more specialised volumes II to VII of particular relevance to their interests and responsibilities. It should be stressed, however, that the volumes provide only broad principles and guidelines and have dealt with each type of continuing education programme separately in order to clarify concepts and objectives in these various areas. In practice. continuing education programmes currently operating in most Member States, generally combine several of these approaches. For example many post-literacy programmes are also equivalency programmes and both usually include some aspects of income generation. 6 E. Sorting out the Terms: Educational Concepts, Systems, Processes and Programmes Terminology in the area of continuing education is somewhat confused because thinking in this relatively new area is still somewhat flexible and open to several interpretations. It may be helpful to think of relevant terms under four headings: «concepts», «systems»; «processes» and «Programmes». By «concept» is mean a general idea or notion; by «system» is meant on organized body of connected things or parts such as the structured system of education offered by a government ministry and by «process», is meant a method of operation or a state of carrying on a procedure. By «programme» is meant a structured series of learning events designed to achieve specified outcomes.By way of summary, therefore, the key definitions in the area of continuing education are as follows: 1. Concepts The key concept is of a learning society. In a learning society all agencies and adult individuals are educational providers. All Member Sates are striving to achieve this goal. 2. Systems These include the formal, non-formal and self-learning educational systems and all three contribute to life-long learning. 3. Processes The process central to the concept of a learning society is life-long learning which involves taking full advantage of the educational opportunities provided by the learning society. The term continuing education refers to the processes of providing such opportunities. 4. Programmes The process of continuing education can be implemented by several types of structured experiences or programmes such as post-literacy programmes, equivalency programmes, income-generating programmes, quality of life improvement programmes, individual interest promotion programmes and future oriented programmes. 7 F. Continuing Education and Development Continuing Education is as essential extension of literacy and primary education to promote human resource development. Because of the vast number of variables involved and because of the complexity of their interactions it is not possible to prove that increased education causes increased socio-economic development. Logically, however, it is reasonable to infer that increases in knowledge and skill are needed for the introduction and expansion of modern technology and that education must grow and change if a technologically based socio-economic system is to grow and change. Education seen in this way is an enabling agent for development. Socio-economic growth is of course the main thrust of most development plans in the Third World and most policies are directed at strengthening formal education to ensure that there is adequate knowledge and skill to enable development to occur. Unfortunately, however, this policy has largely failed and social and economic inequalities, low productivity and high levels of illiteracy and semiliteracy remain. Many graduates from formal schooling are unemployed and unemployable and because the formal educational system is largely urban in its orientation there has been a massive population shift from rural areas to cities. Schooling in some countries has in fact so alienated some people from the mainstream of society that social systems have tended to break down and conflict and aggression have become commonplace. This crisis in education in the Third World has come about largely because the formal system caters only for a handful of successful students and the rest become alienated and unproductive. Continuing education, that is the opportunity to engage in lifelong learning, therefore emerges as a way of compensating for the inadequacies of the formal system by giving people a second chance, and also of ensuring a continual growth and upgrading of human resources throughout the lives of all citizens. Human resource development (HRD) becomes the focus of attention. Appropriately educated people develop positive attitudes and skills, can improve the quality of their work and can increase their incomes. People can save and invest and a general upgrading of the socio-economic structure of society occurs based on the emergence of secure, happy and prosperous individuals and families. With such improved human resources and in particular because of both a stronger domestic economy and an improved quality of the human mind, the third world would be better able to manage its scarce national resources and so ensure effective, appropriate and sustainable development. These ideas are illustrated in figure 1.3.8 A focus on human resource development through continuing education has another important implication for overall socio-economic development. Most development theorists argue that education alone is not enough to ensure that development will occur. They state that unemployment, illiteracy and social inequality are caused by structural aspects of society which education alone cannot address. Some extremists, usually those following Marxist ideology, would even argue that schooling is deliberately imposed in such a way that structural reforms cannot occur and that the system ensures dependency of the majority who are poor and disadvantaged on the few who are wealthy and powerful. In advancing these arguments, however, such theorists usually have only formal education in mind. Continuing education, that is the provision for lifelong learning, does two things to overcome this problem. Firstly it equips individuals with the mental abilities and practical skills necessary to address structural weaknesses in society. Secondly, and perhaps even more significantly, it changes the emphasis from something «imposed from above», such as a formal system of institutionalised education, to something self initiated and self sustained by individual learners. In continuing education it is the individuals who set and pursue their learning objectives, not the system. Continuing education, therefore, not only equips people to bring about structural changes hi society; it empowers them to do so. If continuing education promotes the growth of human resources and leads to significant socio-economic gains, the question emerges what sort of socio-economic development should it generate? Human resource development in some countries is seen to be synonymous with manpower development the production of an educated work force, and the build up of «human capital». Others see it more in terms of an overall improved quality of life involving all dimension’s of personal growth. Another issue is that human resource development in some countries is dealt with sectorally in different planning documents and is implemented by several, frequently competing agencies. There is an absence of co-ordinated action. If continuing education is seen as the mechanism for human resource development these types of issues can be more readily addressed. If there is a well organized and co-ordinated infrastructure for continuing education, and if continuing education policies are based on national planning, then all aspects of human resource development can be systematically advanced. There is another important aspect. As more people become involved in lifelong learning and improve their educational standards and ways of life, more will be involved in social decision making at all levels. Development plans will come to reflect what people want and need based on their reasoned understanding of potentials and limitations. In this way a truly sustainable development is likely to emerge. In other words, development will reflect the concerns of the people and will be fair to both the present and the future. It is more likely to leave future generations at least a similar, but hopefully better, endowment of resources than at present. 10 G. Conclusion Continuing education has been defined in this chapter as an opportunity to pursue lifelong learning after the completion of primary education or its equivalent. It has been argued that it is the mechanism for human resource development which in turn is the basis of meaningful sustainable socio-economic development. These arguments, if accepted, give continuing education a key role in society. Indeed since formal education alone is now seen to be insufficient and inadequate as the enabling force for development, viable alternatives are needed. Continuing education offers countries an opportunity to face and solve their social and economic problems and to grow and develop according to a meaningful and effective plan. 11 Chapter 2 THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FORMAL EDUCATION AND CONTINUING EDUCATION A. Formal Education as a Component Of Continuing Education In the previous chapter formal education, non-formal education and informal education were described as subsets of continuing education (Figure 1.2), and continuing education was defined as the provision of opportunity for lifelong learning after primary schooling. Adults engaged in continuing education are largely self motivated and establish their own learning agendas. Since continuing education draws on education, wherever it is available, no matter by whom it is provided, it is clear that programmes provided by formal education institutions are only one of many sources and options. Some people may wish to continue for some years in formal education following straight on from primary school. Others may wish to seek education from alternative sources such as non-formal equivalency programmes but return to formal education later. Some even may follow formal units of education quite late in lifeeven after retirement. Most people, however tend to rely more and more on the informal system as they become older. Any system of continuing education therefore, should ensure that a wide variety of agencies and modalities is available in all localities and that these provide as broad a range of activities as possible. B. The Issue of Complementarity The various subsectors or systems of continuing education formal, non-formal and self learning do not stand alone. They are complementary in two ways. In the first place during the progression of any one persons life, he or she draws on all three subsectors as required for completing individual learning tasks. In this way all three are integrated into an individual’s personal development programme and so each contributes to the lifelong «curriculum» of the individual.In the second place each type of continuing education provider helps and supports other providers. Ideally all providers should be part of a network which should be administered so as to avoid costly redundancies, overlapping provision or inappropriate or ineffective programmes and activities. Each provider in the network should be aware of the work of providers in similar fields and each should complement the work of the others. As agreed by a UNESCO workshop in 1985 complementary means «mutual support between the formal and other systems of education in respect of mobilisation and utilisation of physical facilities, personnel, administrative structure, 13 curriculum and instruction materials, training of teachers and supervisors and evaluation certification procedure and techniques that have developed within formal, and non-formal education».1 C. Differences between Formal Education and Other Subsectors of Continuing Education While formal education is likely to remain an important component of lifelong learning for at least the foreseeable future, it is the non-formal and informal systems which make up most of the learning experiences of adults. It is important, therefore to appreciate the key differences between formal education on one hand and of the remaining components in the other. Table 2.1: Some differences between formal education and the other two systems of Continuing Education2 No. Criterion Formal Education Non-formal Education and Self Learning 1. Objective To acquire lifelong skills and to obtain a certificate 1 Coordination and Complementarity. Bangkok, UNESCO 1985. 2 Based on a table given by Hussain, Mohd. Hoesne in a paper «Non-formal Education as a Complementary Strategy to Human Resource Development» presented during the UNESCO/ PROAP Planning Meeting for Literacy Personnel Training Activities for 1990, Hua Hin, Thailand, 16-23 April 1990, p.8. 14 To acquire skills for immediate use. 2. Time-frame It takes a long time to obtain the certificates and it involves full-time concentration. Short and intermittent. 3. Curriculum Academic in approach Unacademic but it suits the needs of the target groups/ functionnal. 4. Methodology Institutional with authoritarian teacher/student relationship Flexible. Adult oriented. Stress on independent learning. 5. Control Top down relationship Flexible. depending on situation, but largely self initiated. Each individual learner will call on the resources of both types of system throughout lifelong learning but commitment to formal education is usually more difficult in terms of time and effort, is frequently off target and is usually expensive. It is not surprising therefore, that the proportion of time spent in formal education by almost all adults is considerably less than for the other approaches to continuing education. This point is another strong argument why educational ministries should give at least as much support for the non-formal and informal aspects of continuing education as for the formal system. Arlen Wayne Etling in his book Characteristics of Facilitators the Ecuador Project and Beyond3 has elaborated six dimensions of education outside of the formal system. They are: a) learner centred b) cafeteria curriculum c) horizontal relationship d) reliance on local resources e) immediate usefulness f) low level of structure Each of these dimensions is briefly described below from the perspective of continuing education.(a) Learner-Centred. In non-formal and informal education the learning is initiated and controlled by the learner. Learners create their own learning environment rather than have it imposed from above or from outside. The learner either defines his or her own learning objectives or participates in formulating them. (b) Cafeteria Curriculum. The curriculum is flexible and open to negotiation. It is determined by the choice of the learner and is not prescribed or required by someone else and may not always even be sequential. (c) Horizontal Relationship. Educators become facilitators rather than teachers. The relationship between «facilitator» and «learner» is friendly and informal and the learner views the facilitator as a resource rather than as an instructor. Facilitators may come from the formal subsector but have changed roles in non formal and informal education. Some facilitators may be members of a group of learners who have leadership ability or some special skill or knowledge to be shared with others. 3 Quoted by Hussain, M.H. Ibid p.8 15 (d) Reliance on Local Resources. In most developing countries resources for all forms of education, including non-formal programmes and informal learning, are scarce. Inexpensive alternatives and use of local resources therefore becomes essential. (e) Immediate Usefulness. Non-formal and informal approaches stress functional learning of immediate and direct relevance to the lives of learners. As contrasted to formal education, even formal education selected by an individual as part of his or her lifelong learning path non-formal and informal learning involves immediate action and direct application of what has been learnt. The pay-off is tangible and direct and increases in material well being. Outside the formal system activities tend to be short with a «present time» not «future time» orientation. Non-formal and informal approaches are superior forms of continuing education where the object is to change immediate action or initiate new action. (f) Low level of Structure. Outside of formal education learning activities are diverse and flexible and this implies there should be a diversity of structure. From a systems point of view some provision for continuing education appears uncoordinated, fragmented and diffuse. From an individual learners point of view such fragmentation does not matter in terms of developing and catering for his or her lifelong learning plan. In fact the more diverse the situation the more options are available and the greater the likelihood of finding activities which fit the learning plan. What matters is that the learner (i) has an easy way of finding out what is available and (ii) has ready access to the activities, and (iii) can initiate his or her own learning activities. This implies that some planning is needed and as stressed in Section B all providers should be part of a network and should aim for complementarity. D. The Disjunction between Formal Education and Other Systems of Continuing Education A review of the issues raised in Section C makes it fairly clear that formal education within continuing education may not always be as appropriate as either the non-formal or informal approaches. This is for three reasons: (i) for most adults formal units of education make up only small segments of the lifelong learning plan, and then generally only when people are relatively young (ii) the methods of formal education are not always appropriate for adult learners and (iii) the objectives set by teachers in the formal system rarely exactly match the objectives set by individual learners to meet their own needs. In many formal education programmes the «match» between the learner and the course offered is minimal. In extreme cases teachers take the view that the learners are there to serve the subject, not the subject to serve the learners. For them the structure and «beauty» of the subject is all that matters since the subject matter has educational viability in its own right. Physics teachers, for example, frequently argue that it is the beauty and elegance of physical theory which matters and its relevance to life and applications in work are incidental. These views tend to become more prominent in higher levels of formal education and reach their extremes in many university programmes. 16 For these reasons it is not surprising that many adults find it difficult to insert units of formal education into their unfolding lifelong learning plan especially later in life. The question arises what can be done to moderate this disjunction? Malcolm Knowles, the well-known American continuing educationist, takes the extreme view that formal education should be abandoned altogether, at least in its present form, and be totally integrated into a system of delivery for planned lifelong learning (see Chapter 5). There have been others before him such as Ivan Illich who have advocated the «deschooling» of society4. While there are strong arguments in favour of this extreme view it is unlikely to come about in the foreseeable future, at least in the developing countries of Asia and the Pacific. The type of action which could and perhaps should be pursued now would be to change the emphasis on formal education so that it is seen to be an integral part of lifelong learning. This would mean that at primary school pupils should not only learn, but also learn how to learn and be given the impetus and motivation to continue to learn as they get older. At secondary school level the curriculum should be more open and the methods of teaching more flexible and individually oriented. Secondary schools should find out more about what people need and respond to those needs. But probably the most significant reform should be that all formal educational institutions should be an integral part of the infrastructure for continuing education and should not stand aside as at present. Certainly they should be part of any continuing education network which may be established (see Chapter 5). Ideally they should be accessed through a system of learning centres of the type proposed by Malcolm Knowles (Chapter 5). As a first step, perhaps, the material and human resources «locked up» in formal institutions should be more flexibly employed to meet the lifelong educational needs of the community as a whole. 4 Illich, Ivan Deschooling Society New York: Harper and Row, 1974. 17 Chapter 3 THE PRESENT STATUS OF CONTINUING EDUCATION A. Introduction The aim of ATLP-CE is to assist Member States to develop or strengthen their systems of continuing education. At present the levels of development and the approaches taken from country to country are highly varied. Overall there appears to be three main areas of concern: (i) the need to strengthen continuing education as an agency for life-long learning beyond the level of primary education or its equivalent; (ii) the need to relate continuing education to socioeconomic development through the promotion of human resource development, and (iii) the need to develop a systematic approach to the management and delivery of continuing education while retaining its necessary diversity, flexibility and local control. This chapter briefly reviews the present status and management of continuing education in ten selected countries. B. Continuing Education in Ten Selected Countries The ten countries selected for review are mainly from Asia and the Pacific but some from other Regions (Europe and Africa) have been included for comparison. The countries are at various stages of socio-economic development. Some (e.g. Australia, U.K.) are developed nations; others are at intermediate but rapidly improving stages of development (e.g. Philippines and Thailand3 and others are underdeveloped (e.g. Mali). The levels of development and the approaches taken in continuing education from country to country have certain elements of similarity but the situation is actually quite varied, and is strongly related to the stage of development of each country and to the pattern of its general educational system. The outlines provided below are based on the following sources: i) Reference documents for the UNESCO PROAP Planning Meeting for Literacy Personnel Training Activities of 1990, Hua Hin, Thailand, 16-33 April 1990. ii) Country papers presented at the above meeting. iii) The publication «Continuing Education in Asia and the Pacific» Bulletin of the UNESCO Principal Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific No. 28 September 1987. iv) The publication «Adult Education in Thailand» in Adult Education and Development No. 33 September 1989 published by the German Adult Education 19 Association for the World Conference on Education for All. v) Country reports given at recent UNESCO workshops and meetings on postliteracy and continuing education in Asia and the Pacific and elsewhere. (a) AUSTRALIA Continuing education, while well established, is not nationally co-ordinated and there are independent and varied initiatives by the various states and territories. Throughout the country, however, much of noncredit adult education has been conducted by higher education institutions such as universities, colleges, teacher education institutions and technical and further education colleges, and also by local community centres. In most states there are Boards of Adult Education, or Departments of Community Services or their equivalent which promote a wide range of learning activities for adults. In addition to the programmes offered by tertiary institutions these Boards promote activities through a network of adult education evening colleges. Most frequently these colleges utilize the resources of a local primary school after school hours. Many other agencies are involved in continuing education and while they usually have established co-ordination links with the relevant State Board, that is by no means always the case. These agencies include community learning centres, artistic and cultural bodies, sporting groups, social clubs, museums, art galleries, craft societies, libraries, zoos and botanical gardens, local history groups, local government agencies, national parks and wildlife centres and many agencies within the business and commercial community. It would seem, however, that most State Governments have yet to recognize that in value-for-money terms, adult and continuing education represent the best available value. Further, community education has become a major vehicle for women to grow and develop and explore new personal directions within a responsive environment and governments need to further strengthen that aspect. In Australia, at least until now (1993), continuing education has beep equated with adult education and the relationships between formal, non-formal and informal education in lifelong learning have not been fully appreciated. There has also been a failure at the national level to appreciate the human resource development aspects of continuing education. While Australia is now, in many respects, a learning society, the focus of learning is not on the socio-economic needs of the nation as a whole. (b) INDIA A statement entitled «Adult and Continuing Education» was included hi the National Policy on Education in 1986. This advocated: (i) establishment of learning centres in rural areas 20 for continuing education; (ii) worker’s education; (iii) programmes of distance education based on a self-learning approach; (iv) need and interest based vocational training; and (v) programmes to promote the wider use of books libraries and reading centres. Libraries and reading rooms of formal educational institutions are open to the public in the evenings and necessary financial support is available for this function. Voluntary efforts to establish reading rooms and libraries are encouraged. Since 1988 a major government initiative has been to establish Jana Shikshan Nilayams (Centres for Continuing Education) (JSNs) throughout the country as the core of an infrastructure for continuing education. These are learning centres which bring together programmes originally organized as part of farmer’s twining programmes, youth clubs, the mobile and village library system and rural reading rooms. Even more recently (post 1992) under a new strategy for Teaching Learning Centres, the JSNs are only one form of centre providing post-literacy and other types of continuing education. More recently established centres are volunteer-based and as in the first phase of the campaign for basic literacy have multiple objectives. These involve remediation, upgrading of competencies, and retention and application of basic literacy skills. (c) INDONESIA In Indonesia the formal educational system is more closely integrated into continuing education and out-of-school programmes provide equivalency courses by alternative means for both primary education (Paket A) and junior secondary education (Paket B). It is also proposed to develop an alternative equivalent for Senior High School (Paket C). Indonesia therefore defines continuing education very broadly and consistently with the definition promoted under ATLP-CE. Continuing Education is defined as «educational programmes after basic education has been attained» i.e. in-school education at junior high, senior high and university levels; out of school alternatives (Pakets A, B and C); skill-formation programmes such as income generating groups, apprenticeships; upgrading courses and family education programmes at home. An important aspect for Indonesia is that the relationship between continuing education and lifelong learning is appreciated and the central aim is to promote the development of a learning society. A weakness before 1987 was that while many agencies, mainly government departments, were effective providers, there was no National Co-ordinating Commission for Continuing Education and policies were not fully co-ordinated. But after 1987, when the APPEAL Indonesia was created, national co-ordination of efforts has been achieved. Agencies involved in continuing education in Indonesia and the types of programmes offered are listed below: 21 Agency Ministry of Education and Culture (MOE) in Cooperation with other Ministries MOE with the Ministry of Manpower MOE alone Indonesian Scout Movement Ministry of Agriculture Family Life Welfare Movement Family Planning Coordination Board National Sports Committee Office of the Minister of Role of Women Ministry of Information Programme Income Generating Learning Groups Vocational courses Apprenticeship training Pakets A, B and C Scout leaders training Farmers learning groups Learning groups on Peoples Plantations Family Life Education Courses Family Planning Groups Sports training Training Sports Club Leaders Income-generating groups for women TV and radio learning group broadcasts (d) JAPAN In Japan continuing education is well established and is defined as the mechanism for developing a learning society. Constantly with ATLP-CE continuing education is perceived as proceeding after basic education has been attained, that is it is for literate adults (including youth). Because of the strength and success of formal education in Japan there is little need for basic literacy programmes or catch-up equivalency programmes through a non formal system. What is emphasised is vocational education; cultural activities, especially for women and the aged; and physical recreation. These types of programmes are popular with people of all ages. The library and museum movements in Japan are especially well developed and libraries and museums are important agencies for continuing education. The total number of public libraries in Japan in 1983 was 1, 644 with a staff of 13,145 trained personnel. There were 676 public museums staffed by 10,368 appropriately trained personnel. 22 The Japanese government directly provides the following types of activities outside the formal education system: social correspondence education; specialized training schools; skill examinations; vocational training; university extension courses; university of the air; educational broadcasting and information services and projects. Private enterprise, especially the manufacturing and business communities, are also heavily involved in continuing education through the provision of in-house training and by working with the general public. (e) MALI In 1967 a nation-wide functional literacy programme was launched in the framework of the «Experimental World Literacy Programme». This programme consisted of three cycles (i) literacy; (ii) post-literacy and (iii) lifelong education. The programme continues and views education as a key mechanism of social and economic development. Continuing Education is seen to be for adults outside of formal education. The activities under the programme are initiated by several types of agencies and many, especially in the post-literacy area, arise spontaneously or are initiated by local authorities. The programmes are relatively unstructured and uncoordinated. The main thrust is the production of reading and extension materials, but these are produced by a wide variety of organizations, both government and non-government. Most focus on specific projects such as groundnuts and food cultivation; rice growing in specific regions; high valley projects; livestock keeping; fishing and cooperative movements. Specific materials are also produced by the national offices of Cooperation, Health, and Waterways and Forests. Another important facet of continuing education is the Rural Press. A newspaper «Kibaru» was founded in 1972 with the aim of promoting reading, and of preventing literacy regression and of developing skill development. It’s Editorial Board is representative of various agencies such as the Ministry of Information, The Press and Publications Agency; Functional Literacy Department; Institute of Rural Affairs; Health Education; Office of Waterways and Forests and the National Directorate of Cooperation. Educational broadcasts are also promoted and focus on aspects of rural development. Activities are coordinated by the Educational Radio Service and call on the services of all agricultural development organisations. There is also a special government programme to provide more advanced education for neoliterates. Training courses are provided for newly literate peasants to help them understand and apply new scientific knowledge and technological innovations relevant to their lives. (f) PHILIPPINES Continuing education is defined as the provision of opportunities for lifelong learning beyond basic literacy and primary education, including formal education beyond these levels. 23 Nevertheless those aspects of continuing education outside the formal education system are administered by a separate Bureau of Non-Formal (Continuing) Education within the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports. The link between education and development is appreciated in the Philippines and the government has promoted education to raise the general standard of living, to provide opportunity for youth and adults to acquire marketable skills and to improve the general quality of life. Currently (1990) the Government is encouraging closer co-operation and complementarity between non formal and formal education and there is a good working relationship among the many agencies involved in formal and non formal programmes. Nongovernment agencies are also active in continuing education and most cooperate with relevant government agencies. The main government agency is the Bureau of Non-formal Education which provides (i) a range of programmes for out-of-school youth (ii) post-literacy work for adults (iii) training in livelihood skills (iv) self-help and self-reliance programmes and (v) education in values. Training of continuing education personnel is seen to be an important aspect. In 1986 the Bureau of Non-Formal Education initiated a National Training Programme for multidisciplinary educational personnel in the rural areas to facilitate the planning, implementation and evaluation of continuing education activities in the context of rural development. (g) TANZANIA Continuing education is the responsibility of the Adult Education Directorate of the Ministry of National Education. There is a well organized infrastructure consisting of (i) regional adult education co-ordinators (ii) district adult education co-ordinators (iii) divisional education officers and (iv) ward officers. At each level there is an Adult Education Committee and membership is representative of relevant agencies such as Ministries of Health, Labour and Social Welfare and the Prime Ministers Office. A co-ordination system links all levels to ensure maximum participation and to reduce redundancy. The system is seen to lie outside of the formal education network and caters for literate adults beyond primary school grade. The main thrust is the establishment of simple village libraries or reading centres (in about 8,000 villages by the mid 1970s). These provide various types of books and other reading materials in a graded postliteracy series. They build on the skills of adults who have attained literacy through their participation in national functional literacy programmes. The centres are also supported by a library service which provides mobile book boxes on a rotation basis. The training of personnel for continuing education is seen to be especially important. Two-week orientation courses on library techniques and one-week refresher courses are provided each year for district, ward and village leaders and librarians in charge of the reading centres. 24 (h) THAILAND Continuing education is seen to be the mechanism for lifelong learning and to cater for all those literate youths and adults beyond the level of primary schooling. The term «non-formal» however, is used not just for catch up equivalency programmes but for all forms of adult education outside of the formal system. Continuing education is administered by the Ministry of Education Department of Non-Formal Education (NFE) which was created in 1979 by merging the previous Divisions of Adult Education, the Centre for Educational Museums and the Centre for Educational Technology. Its responsibilities, apart from basic adult literacy, include (i) compensatory education for the disadvantaged (ii) short courses in skills training (iii) reading promotion (iv) educational museums and (v) education through the mass media. The NFE Department also has a co-ordinating role promoting links with other relevant agencies and is also responsible for research, planning and development in continuing education. It has a major role in training continuing education personnel for all levels and programmes of the system. It also facilitates the work of other continuing education agencies through the provision of subsidies and general services. There is a well developed infrastructure under the Department of NFE. Under the central office in Bangkok there are four regional R & D Centres and in each province there is a central Lifelong Education Centre providing a variety of programmes in post-literacy, income generation, educational equivalency and quality of life improvement. At the local level there is a network of village learning centres, encouraged and supported by Provincial Lifelong Education Centres. The village centres are managed by the villagers themselves and have reading centres, basic educational facilitates, resources for social activities and community meeting halls. Equivalency programmes comparable to formal school grades 6, 9 and 12 are offered by NFE in three alternative modes (i) classroom situations (ii) radio correspondence and (iii) self instruction. An information service is provided through (i) a network of public libraries (ii) village reading centres (iii) radio and TV programmes for schools and adult classes and (iv) museum education. The NFE Department also produces educational films and other audio-visual resources. In the area of skills training, attention focuses mainly on industry, home economics, business and agriculture and is provided by three types of activities: (i) vocational classes in day schools; (ii) mobile vocational classes in rural areas and (iii) interest groups, mainly in rural areas. (I) UNITED KINGDOM The United Kingdom is essentially a learning society but as in Australia this situation has evolved unsystematically over many decades (indeed in U.K. over many centuries). It is therefore uncoordinated and highly decentralised. There is an almost infinite range of opportunity for adult learning in almost any area of knowledge provided by a multiplicity of both government and non-government agencies. Because of this complexity these notes focus on only one aspect i.e. the newly emerging post-literacy programmes. 25 The need for post-literacy programmes arose as it became clear that the population included an unacceptably large number of semiliterate adults. Programmes to raise literacy levels emerged in the 1980s as a result of informed dialogue between local organizers and adult educators on the one hand, and consultant advisers of central agencies on the other. Agencies responsible for promoting post-literacy activities are the Adult Literacy and Basic Skills Unit (ALBSU), the National Institute of Adult Education in England and Wales (NIAE), and the Scottish Adult Basic Education Unit (SCABU). The infrastructure is very loose and unstructured with an emphasis on local effort. At central level there is a Government National Advisory Council for Adult and Continuing Education (ACACE) which has links with the National Institute of Adult Education. There is little central ministerial control of curriculum or methodology. Other agencies cooperate in the work of the ACACE including the Manpower Services Commission, the Open University and the British Broadcasting Cooperation. Training of CE personnel is provided centrally by the ACACE and centrally trained trainers and activists train others at district and local level. Further training opportunities for adult workers are provided under a training opportunities scheme sponsored by the Manpower Service Commission. An important outlet for post-literacy work is provided by the nationwide library service which has an extension service of motorised traveling libraries for remote villages. Librarians work closely with adult educators and have links with the broadcast media, especially radio. Library personnel working with adult educators also conduct door-to-door contact campaigns. (I) VIETNAM Up until 1990 the Government had given high priority to the eradication of illiteracy because of conviction that ability to read and write awakens consciousness and stimulates participation in political action. Eradication of illiteracy therefore, was seen as the first step in the process of raising cultural standards. The Government, however, is now ready to develop a system of continuing education. As a beginning a good start has been made on programmes of complementary education offered to literate adults. These provide essential knowledge and skill for all types of workers with the aims of increasing productivity and of enabling the workforce to utilize modern techniques and equipment. Another aspect of continuing education in Vietnam is the provision of «specific topic» non-formal education for farmers. Topics include rice growing, hog-breeding, birth control, improving cooking facilites and similar functional topics. About thirty topics are covered each year and each topic involves one to three sessions of 1 1/2 2 hours duration. Continuing education schools and classes are also provided for ethnic minorities in language and as part of the complementary education system (second level equivalency). C. Trends and Issues The following general trends and issues emerge firm the country situations outlined above. 26 a) Most Member States in the sample view continuing education as the provision of opportunity for lifelong learning beyond basic literacy and primary education. b) There are some differences in regard to defining the scope of continuing education. Most see it as including formal, non formal and informal education but a minority view it as something outside of and beyond formal education. c) The role of continuing education as a mechanism for socio-economic development is appreciated by most. Continuing education as human resource development (HRD) and the relationship between HRD and socio-economic development, however, is not usually stated clearly. This is reflected in the absence of strong linkages between national socio-economic planning and continuing education policy. d) Objectives of continuing education are usually expressed or implied as improvement in quality of life and living standards of all citizens. e) There is a wide range of target clientele for continuing education but in most countries the emphasis is on rural communities, disadvantaged groups, neoliterates and semiliterates and those needing training in vocational and income-generating skills. The types of activities frequently include the following: i) Vocational/technical courses, apprenticeship programmes. ii) Income-generating activities iii) Extension and equivalency education iv) Arts and culture v) Specific learning programmes such as farmer education, population/family life education, health and nutrition programmes, and so on vi) Rural libraries and reading centres promoting post-literacy skills vii) Self-reliance programmes. f) Linkages and networking are strong in some countries and relatively weak in others. On the whole infrastructure is partial only in that, where present at all, it mainly caters for and co-ordinates government initiatives alone. In most cases (there are exceptions) the infrastructure does not adequately involve nongovernment providers. g) Several countries lack National Policy Boards or Co-ordination Agencies. In some, even government initiatives in CE are uncoordinated and are the responsibility of a variety of ministries and departments which pursue more or less independent programmes. It would seem that some instrumentalities (e.g. Health, Agriculture) whose primary function is outside education, do not perceive themselves as educational agencies and therefore tend to stand aside from educational networks. 27 h) Only few countries have recognized that lifelong learning is the initiative of each individual and that individuals determine their learning objectives throughout life and need access to all forms of formal, non-formal and informal educationnal opportunities to achieve these objectives. Almost all reports on which the above country summaries were based were government and provider centred, not learner centred. This is why in most countries the formal educational system is seen to be something apart and not just one component of continuing education. i) While several countries (e.g. India, Tanzania, Thailand, United Kingdom) have appreciated the need for clearly defined contact or entry points for individuals to engage in the system, some have not. The role of local learning centres in this regard has been highlighted in some countries but not in others. j) The training of a cadre of professional continuing educators to encourage and help all types of providers and to administer a systematic delivery system is appreciated by most countries in the sample. Some countries, however, have still to address this issue. k) there are varying attitudes to decentralization and local management and control. In some countries CE is seen clearly to be a «grass roots» matter under the control of local people. In others it is seen mainly as an instrument of government and is controlled and administered centrally. l) The relationship between literacy and continuing education is clearly perceived by all Member States. Countries which in the past, have had to focus mainly on the eradication of illiteracy, are now able to change their priorities and to begin and/or strengthen continuing education to consolidate and build on literacy achievements. m) Almost all countries see the promotion of the reading habit and the provision of appropriate reading materials as a central responsibility for continuing education. Mechanisms for achieving this (e.g. libraries, reading centres, book-mobiles, postliteracy workshop and so on) vary from country to country. D. Conclusion Fundamentally, there appears to be an underlying weakness common to almost all systems of continuing education reviewed in this chapter. It is essentially that CE policies are not adequately integrated with national dvelopment policy and as a result few governments seem to quite know what CE is for; how it should be administered and what should be its outcomes and contributions to personal and national well-being. This problem in turn causes other problems. The most serious of these is that in even the most efficient and well organized approaches there is at best only a partial infrastructure for organizing, administering, promoting and evaluating continuing education as a system. ATLP-CE offers an exemplar of a systematic approach to the organization of CE hopefully without inhibiting its necessary diversity and creative individuality. This approach is described and briefly discussed in Chapters 4 and 5. 28 Chapter 4 ATLP-CE: ITS ORIGIN, SCOPE AND DEVELOPMENT A. Origin of ATLP-CE Under APPEAL UNESCO PROAP has developed a set of materials and a system of training for literacy personnel in Asia and the Pacific ATLP. The training programme provides guidelines for developing a literacy training curriculum, for designing and producing training materials and for establishing a training infrastructure. A systems approach has been adopted for all aspects from macro to micro levels. By macro level is meant the development of a national literacy training policy and system and by microlevel is meant the design, production and use of training materials and of specific training activities using a systematic INPUT-PROCESSOUTPUT model 1. During 1988 and 1989 twelve volumes for ATLP were produced by UNESCO PROAP, Bangkok and Regional, Sub-Regional and National Workshops have been held to familiarize literacy workers with these materials and to train them in their application. The titles of the volumes are shown below (Figure 4.1). The materials were produced with three levels of personnel in mind as shown in the triangular diagram (Figure 4.2). 1 Principles-of Curriculum Design for Literacy Training All 2 Principles of Resource Design for Literacy Training All 3 Manual for Senior Administrators of Literacy Training Programmes A 4 Manual for Supervisors Resource Development and Training Procedures B 5 Exemplar Training Manual Extra Money for the Family C 6 Exemplar Training Manual Our Forests C 7 Exemplar Training Manual Village Co-operative C 8 Exemplar Training Manual Health Services C 9 Specifications for Additional Exemplar Training Manuals C and B 10 Post-Literacy Activities and Continuing Education A and B 11 Evaluating a Literacy Training Programme A and B 12 Implementing a Literacy Training Programme All 1 Meyer G. Rex «The development of minicourses (with basis in educational technology) for the In service Education of Teachers and Trainers» PLETVOL. 6 No. I February 1979, pp. 23-37. 29 Figure 4.1 The twelve Volumes of ATLP Produced by UNESCO PROAP in 1988 and 1989. Senior Management Provincial/district Supervisors (including trainers of trainers) Instructors and Trainers (Teachers) Level A Level B Level C Figure 4.2 Three levels of literacy trainig personnel catered for by ATLP 30 ATLP, however, is designed to help Member States achieve universal literacy by the year 2000 or soon after and therefore should be seen only as an interim programme. ATLP however, has promoted the development of a systematic infrastructure and well trained personnel for literacy development which with some amendment and adaptation could provide an overall framework for continuing education. The majority of Member States of Asia and the Pacific are now implementing continuing education programmes or are ready to begin work in this area. As literacy becomes universal the ideal of lifelong learning and the evolution of a learning society become real possibilities. As ATLP successfully achieves its objectives it could evolve into a new programme to help Member States develop and/or strengthen their continuing education systems. The new programme now offered by UNESCO PROAP as an extension of ATLP has been titled ATLP-CE. This present volume is the first in a series of eight for the ATLP-CE Project. The issues and challenges of modifying ATLP into a support and training programme for continuing education (i.e. to convert ATLP to ATLP-CE) have been broadly addressed in Volume 10 of ATLP itself. That volume is entitled Post-literacy Activities and Continuing Education (see Figure 4.1). Readers are invited to study the ATLP Volumes, especially Volumes 1, 2, 3 and 10 before proceeding further with ATLP-CE. B. ATLP-CE and the Evolution of a Learning Society In developing societies there has been and in most there continues to be an evolution or growth from a stage where the majority of people are illiterate through well defined stages, such as functional literacy for most, to autonomous learning for most to the appearance finally of a learning society in which all adult societal agencies and all citizens are involved in education. The phases of this societal evolution are given in figure 4.3. This is a reproduction of figure 1.1 from ATLP Volume 10. The essential mechanism for achieving the transition from neo-literacy to the emergence of a learning society is continuing education. ATLP-CE aims to assist Member States establish systematic policies and a well-planned infrastructure for continuing education, to provide guidelines for training continuing education personnel and to devise a system of delivering continuing education to all citizens in such a way that the elements of a learning society can begin early in development and be enriched as the system evolves. C. The Essential Framework for ATLP-CE Under APPEAL there are projects, programmes and activities in three interacting areas (i) Eradication of Illiteracy (EOI) (ii) Universal Primary Education (UPE) and (iii) Continuing Education (CE). In the case of eradication of illiteracy the APPEAL ATLP project has been a main focus. The overall framework for ATLP is illustrated below in Figure 4.4 which is reproduced here from the preface in each ATLP Volume. 31 Figure 4.3 Stages in the evolution of learning society. To the left and right solid lines indicate phases of maximum involment and dotted lines represent either extensions or early origins. For example while lifelong learning by definition is from birth to death for adults, meaningful engagement in life-long learning cannot begin until a person is a genuinely autonomous learner. For more detail see ATLP Volume 10. Literacy process Adult target General educationnal processes and systems ILLITERATES SEMI-LITERATE NEO-LITERATES ADEQUATELY FUNCTIONAL LITERATES AUTONOMOUS LEARNERS LEARNING SOCIETY 32 In ATLP the three target levels in the central column of the diagram (levels A, B and C) are involved in literacy development but there are close links with UPE and CE. The main output of the system is a series of literacy training manuals (1-24) to be developed by Member States using ATLP principles and exemplars as broad guidelines. A similar type of framework is proposed for ATLP-CE and this is illustrated in figure 4.5 APPEALINTERNATIONAL LITERACY NETWORK CONTINUING EDUCATION EOI LEVEL A MANAGEMENT MANUAL Figure 4.4 The general framework for ATLP The targets in the central column of the diagram (figure 4.5) are the continuing education personnel at levels A, B and C but as in the case of ATLP there are links with the other components of APPEAL. A key difference between ATLP and ATLP-CE is the nature of the output suggested for Member States. In the case of ATLP it is a training curriculum, trained personnel and a systematic set of Mining materials. In the case of ATLP-CE it is the development of a planned CE policy, an effective infrastructure, trained personnel and a delivery system at local level which will accelerate the evolution of a learning society. UPE (POLICY-MAKERS) Feedback Policy on Policy Decisions EOI LEVEL B TRAINING MANUAL (SUPERVISORS AND TRAINERS OF TRAINERS) Implementation Feedback on Implementation Procedures EOI LEVEL C TRAINING GUIDES (Teachers/Trainers) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Key : EOI = Eradication of Illiteracy UPE = Universal Primary Education 33 APPEALINTERNATIONAL NETWORK EOI LEVEL A CE MANAGEMENT (POLICY-MAKERS) VOLUME I: ATLP-CE UPE Feedback on Policy CONTINUING EDUCATION LEVEL B SUPERVISORS AND TRAINERS OFTRAINERS TRAINING MANUALS ATLP-CE VOLUME 28 Feedback on Implementation LEVEL C LEARNING CENTRES Level C PROVIDERS Policy Decisions Implementation Procedures FAMILY CENTRES PLANNING BANKS OUTLETS RETAIL GOVERNMENT AGENCIESLOCAL GOVERNMENT CLUBS AGENCIES Figure 4.5 The essential framework for ATLP-CE SPORTING GROUPS EVENING OTHERS COLLEGES BOTANICAL AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION PROGRAMMES CENTRES HEALTH INSTITUTIONS RELIGIOUS GARDENS VOCATIONAL TRAINING CENTRES OTHERS Key : EOI = Eradication of Illiteracy UPE = Universal Primary Education COUNSELLING AND COLLEGE GUIDANCE SERVICES CHURCH/TEMPLE /MOSQUE TRANSPORT CENTRES BOOKMOBILES FACTORIES OTHERS SCHOOLS POST-LITERACY CENTRES VILLAGE READING CENTRES SECONDMENTS PROVINCIAL FARMS CENTRES DISTANCE EDUCATION PROGRAMMES TEACHERS COLLEGES RECREATION FORESTRY UNITS CULTURAL CENTRES GAME PARKS/ZOOS CENTRES OTHERS PRIVATE HOMES POLYTECHNICS BUSINESS HOME CENTRES IMPROVEMENT MISSIONS OTHERSHOBBY GROUPS LIBRARIES CONSERVATION PROGRAMMES UNIVERSITIES INTERNSHIPS APPRENTICESHIP MUSEUMS COOPERATIVES PROGRAMMES COMMUNITY HEALTH OTHERS CENTRES CLINICS HOSPITALS34 More specifically the type of delivery system advocated under ATLP-CE has the following elements. (i) a policy determined at level A based on national development plans; (ii) an effective and efficient cadre of professionally trained CE personnel at level B.; (iii) development of a CE network nationally and provincially with direct local access; (iv) a system of local entry points in the form of district level learning centres at level C; (v) a broad variety of local providers who are part of the CE network and whose programmes are known to the learning centres. Providers would come from the formal, non-formal and informal education subsectors; (vi) ready access by all citizens to CE activities at local level, partly through a learning centre and partly by direct contact with a provider. ATLP-CE provides guidelines for the establishment of such a system, especially on how to train personnel at levels A, B and C. Further details of the infrastructure proposed under ATLP-CE are given in Chapter 5. D. Immediate Focus of ATLP-CE At present most Member States of Asia and the Pacific are involved in a range of continuing education activities. A survey suggests that in the main there may be grouped into six categories as follows: a) Post-literacy b) Equivalency c) Quality of life improvement d) Income-generation e) Individual interests f) Future orientation Each of these categories is defined and described elsewhere (Chapters I and 7). While all these types of programme can be accommodated within the overall policies and infrastructure proposed under ATLP-CE, each has its own specific types of delivery systems. ATLP-CE therefore has provided separate guidelines for each type and there is an ATLP-CE Volume on each. 35 The six types of programme promoted under ATLP-CE also reflect the concerns of the World Conference on Education for All which was held in Jomtien, Thailand in March 1990 and set out in its report World Declaration on Education for All Meeting Basic Learning Needs. This report states that all citizens should have the knowledge, skills. values and attitudes required to: • survive and develop to full capacities • live and work in dignity • participate fully in development • improve the quality of their lives • make informed decisions • continue learning It is clear that the ATLP-CE programme types with their focus on personal growth, income generation, quality of life improvement, individual interests and future development are consistent with these principles. ATLP-CE indicates how such needs can be satisfied through a well organized system of continuing education. E. Scope and Development of ATLP-CE Resources produced under ATLP-CE consist of eight volumes as follows: 1. Continuing Education New Policies and Directions 2. Post-Literacy Programmes 3. Equivalency Programmes 4. Income-Generating Programmes 5. Qualify of Life Improvement Programmes 6. The Promotion of Individual Interests through Continuing Education 7. Future-Oriented Programmes 8. Learning Centres Member States are invited to join in a series of Sub-Regional Workshops and later to run in-country national workshops in the understanding and application of the principles of ATLPCE. It should be stressed however, that ATLP-CE, like ATLP, is in no way prescriptive. It offers guidelines and exemplars only and these should be interpreted by Member States entirely according to their needs and circumstances. 36 Chapter 5 AN INFRASTRUCTURE FOR CONTINUING EDUCATION WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO LEARNING CENTRES PART 1: GENERAL INFRASTRUCTURE A. General Background The status and level of development of Continuing Education systems in Member States of Asia and the Pacific is uneven (chapter 3). In particular, infrastructures for continuing education vary a great deal from country to country. In some, continuing education occurs without any co-ordinating body or authority and programmes are presented by any agencies which may wish to be involved on a purely ad hoc basis. In other countries CE is the main responsibility of the Ministry of Education but many other ministries and agencies may also offer programmes (e.g. health, agriculture. employment and industry) and these may not be coordinated. In almost all countries many non-government agencies are involved but they frequently work on their own and there are no links with government. In the cases where the Ministry of Education is responsible or mainly responsible for government initiatives in CUE the precise agencies or departments within the ministry vary from system to system. In some countries the formal education subsector at primary, secondary and university level is given the responsibility for Continuing education as an extension of its normal work. School teachers give CE courses after school hours and schools become afternoon and evening community schools and colleges. In others. special departments of non-formal and/or adult education and/or continuing education accept responsibility. Sometimes their programmes and delivery systems are broad and varied and sometimes narrower and more limited in range and scope. Some Member States have clear-cut national policies for continuing education, others have not. Some have organizational networks in place at all levels, others have none. Some have set up efficient management and training systems for CE and others have only partial systems. Very few countries in the Region have perceived CE both as (i) a viable alternative to formal education and (ii) an agency for human resource development after the completion of formal education and so as the energizer of socio-economic development. Most therefore, tend to down-grade the relative significance of CE vis-a-vis formal education. Resources for the development of an infrastructure for CE represent only a small fraction (less than one per cent) of the resources provided for formal schooling, and yet continuing education provides an opportunity for life-long learning whereas formal education caters, at most, for only about one third of the life span. 37 This chapter attempts to describe a broad infrastructure for CE as an exemplar. Each Member State would need to interpret this relative to its own circumstances and concerns, but hopefully it may provide a broad framework for establishing or strengthening CE systems. B. Overall Coordination In each country there should be a National Coordination Committee or National Council for Continuing Education (NCCCE). While this should perhaps be administered by the Ministry of Education and chaired by the Minister for Education, it should be a representative body with membership from all government agencies providing continuing education from the formal educational system and from relevant non-government agencies. NCCCE should be a high level policy making body with considerable authority and status and with strong financial resources and with support personnel. It should have a permanent Executive Committee of civil servants to implement its policies. The functions of an NCCCE would be to 1) determine and direct all continuing education activities towards the vision of socio-economic development of a country; 2) determine the types of programmes to be promoted under CE; 3) plan for and ensure the production of high quality continuing education materials; 4) plan training programmes for all levels of CE personnel. 5) identify target groups and promote delivery systems to meet their needs; 6) formulate guidelines for planning, co-ordinating and evaluating continuing education activities. In order to be maximally effective the NCCCE and its Executive Committee should have direct organisational links with the National Planning Commission, with relevant research and development units and with any existing future oriented instrumentalities such as a National Commission for the Future. It should establish and promote national level «think tanks» and have access to a range of data banks. 38 The NCCCE should also perceive its role as responding to emerging needs at local level. Therefore, it should not only be «top-down» in its orientation but should receive feedback from and respond to changing needs and circumstances at all levels of the system. In their turn, however, the middle and local levels of the CE infrastructure should develop their activities within the policy framework determined by the NCCCE. NCCCE should also promote the development of a nation-wide CE network by co-ordinating the disparate networks established at provincial level (see Section C). C. Middle Level Management In each province, region or state, there should be a Provincial Co-ordinating Committee or Council for Continuing Education (PCCCE) and each should have its executive body. As in the case of NCCCE each PCCCE should be a representative body. Its functions could be as follows: 1. Interpret and apply NCCCE policy at provincial level 2. Establish a provincial network for CE and relate this to the national network 3. Promote delivery systems, programmes, activities and agencies for CE throughout the province. 4. Identify categories of clientele and cater for their needs 5. Establish a field consultancy service 6. Train providers in the principles and practice of CE 7. Develop good quality materials for continuing education and also help providers produce their own materials. 8. Promote and supervise the establishment of local learning centres 9. Sponsor research and development in CE 10. Monitor and evaluate the impact of CE at provincial and local levels. At provincial level a professional body of continuing education personnel needs to be established and trained to perform the tasks listed above. In some instances the training may be provided by the formal system (by universities and colleges in particular) and in others by inhouse on job systems and by internal staff development activities. D. Points of Delivery at Local Level Provision of opportunity for lifelong learning, that is continuing education. should be available to all adults everywhere. This implies that any infrastructure for continuing education 39 should ensure that programmes and activities are in place locally and that there is ready access to them. Since continuing education can be provided by the formal, non-formal and informal (self learning) subsectors, and since there are many types of continuing education such as postliteracy, equivalency, quality of life, individual interests and so on, it follows that there is usually a multiplicity of agencies providing activities in any given locality see figure 5.1 (reproduced from Volume 10 of the ATLP series). The question arises to what extent should there be intervention and coordination to ensure (i) quality of provision (ii) ready access (iii) coordinated effort and lack of redundancy and (iv) maximum impact. As a minimum two things should occur: 1) All the agencies in any given locality should be part of the provincial continuing education network established by level B personnel. Their work should be facilitated by training offered to them from level B and by help given in designing and providing programmes and activities. 2) A coordinating agency or «entry point» in the form of a Learning Centre should be established in each district or locality. In rural areas there should be one in each village and township. In urban areas there should be one for each city municipality or cluster of suburbs. Such learning centres would have several major roles. These are summarised below: (i) Act as clearing houses of information about CE in the local area and promote the idea of CE locally. (ii) Encourage more local agencies to offer CE and promote local participation. (iii) Offer general learning facilities to the local people(e.g. reading centres, meeting halls), and especially promote the development of a reading habit. (iv) Provide management bases for CE field consultants and visiting level B personnel (v) Act as providing agencies in their own right especially in areas such as basic literacy, post-literacy, income generation and quality of life. Par time staff should be appointed to provide these programmes. (vi) Act as social and community centres for the local people. (v) Provide general community services e.g. health monitoring; agricultural extension; guidance and counselling service and the like. 40 Figure 5.1 A Classification of Some of the Agencies Providing Continuing Education Schools CollegesUniversitiesPolytechnicsAgricultural Institutes Informal Sub-sector Formal Non-formal Non-formal Institutions and Programmes Non-Institutional Resources for Individuals Individual learning projects Formal and non-formal Sub-sectors 41 Correspondence courses Part-time classes Communitybased programmes Such centres should be family oriented and managed by the local people. A representative management committee would need to be established for each. The centres may or may not have formal links with the PCCCE, but in any event they should work with it in close cooperation. E. Overall Infrastructure In summary an effective infrastructure for CE should be established at three levels. Level A: At national level a policy making and coordinating body (NCCCE) should be established. Level B: In each province there should be a Coordinating Committee (PCCCE) to interpret policy, promote CE, train providers and facilitate activities. Level C: In each district (locality) there should be a multiplicity of CE providers (agencies). Their work should be facilitated and in part coordinated by local learning centres managed by committees of local residents. In interpreting the infrastructure illustrated in figure 5.2 it is important to appreciate that the linkages between levels and instrumentalities represent (i) communication pathways and (ii) lines of interactive intervention. Arrow heads have not been shown because the «flow» can occur in any direction between all points of the system. For example policies formulated at level A should not only be based on ideas generated at that level but on feedback received from levels B and C. Middle level management (level B) works with level A and facilitates the work of level C. It is also important to appreciate that the various local providing agencies should not be «controlled» by the system but facilitated by it. If any provider should wish to stand aside from the infrastructure or not be part of the CE network that provider should have the right to be independent. This is an important aspect of any CE infrastructure. It should encourage diversity and a multiplicity of delivery systems. Such systems should not be too constrained by bureaucratic policy or regulations. Creative differences, independent lines of thought and a multiplicity of agencies should be promoted and coordinating agencies such as a PCCCE or a local learning centre should not coerce but encourage and help. 42 This overall scheme is illustrated in figure 5.2 below: CABINET National Planning Authority NCCCE 43 International network R & D Centres Data Banks Think tanks NCCCE Executives Commision for the Future PCCCE PCCCE Executive Trainers Councellors Learning Centre Management Committee Learning Centre Programme Designers Resource Developers Institutional learning Monitors Evaluators Field Consultants Non-Institutional learning Providing Agencies Resources Facilities Figure 5.2: An infrastructure for continuing education NCCCE = National Coordinating Committee for Continuing Education PCCCE = Provincial Coordinating Committeefor Continuing Education PART II LEARNING CENTRES A. Definition and types In broad terms a learning centre is simply any organized place where a person may learn. Schools, polytechnics, museums, libraries and commercial in-house training units are thus learning centres. Under APPEAL, however, and especially under ATLP-CE, the concept has a more specific meaning. It generally refers to a local centre outside the formal education system for a village or an urban community managed by the local people and providing (i) resources for local development and family oriented learning and (ii) information about the what, how, where and when individuals can engage in various types of continuing education locally. Before examining the idea of an ATLP-CE learning centre in greater detail it perhaps may be appropriate to review what the concept means in more general terms. Basically there are three types of learning centre; (i) institution-based (ii) community based and (iii) comprehensive. Type I: Institution-Based: These are centres within an educational or training institution which provide courses and activities for students of that institution and/or members of the general public. Activities are either remedial in nature or course equivalents presented by alternative means. An example is the learning centre network in the technical colleges of Australia. In these centres courses are offered to both members of the public and to students of the colleges in (i) basic literacy (ii) post-literacy (iii) English for non-English speaking migrants, (iv) specific educational remediation and (v) courses of the college presented by alternative means. Activities are all individualised and learning is self-paced. Type II: C o m m u n i t y B a s e d : Village or Urban Centres managed by local people and focusing on the family as a learning unit. They are outside the formal system but may help people obtain formal qualifications by alternative means. They may themselves be providers. They all help individuals, however, to learn either through individual unstructured activities or through the activities of local providers. This is the type of centre promoted under ATLP-CE. Type III: Comprehensive: This type is as yet only theoretical. It is the type proposed by Malcolm Knowles as a holistic life-long learning centre which subsumes the formal, non-formal and informal subsectors into one system and caters for all the learning needs of all people throughout life2. According to Knowles, comprehensive learning centres should facilitate all learning projects undertaken by individuals. They would coordinate the activities of all educational providers in a given community to meet the educational needs of each individual. An individual 2 Knowles, Malcolm S. Creating lifelong learning communities. A paper prepared for the UNESCO Institute for Education, Hamburg, Germany, January 1983. 44 would go to the centre and (i) have his or her learning skills assessed, (ii) have his or her development stages and life role needs diagnosed (iii) meet an educational planner who would help set learning objectives and advise on how they could be achieved and (iv) undertake a learning plan with one or more providers monitored by the centre. The centre would then assess and evaluate outcomes of the learning plan and move the learner on to the next project. The Knowles model is illustrated in figure 5.3. Under the Knowles model all societal agencies are educational providers and the society as a whole is a learning society. B. Learning Centres Under ATLP CE Under ATLP-CE Knowles’ type III comprehensive learning centre could be seen as a long term ideal goal which would not only replace the present system of formal education but also integrate all elements of non-formal and informal education for lifelong learning. T h i s development has not yet occurred anywhere in the world but as societies especially in the Third world, become more and more disillusioned with formal schooling, then this approach could well emerge as a viable alternative. At the present stage of development of most countries of Asia and the Pacific Type II i.e. community-based learning centers, should be promoted. According to Boonlerd Masang3 such centres, should be family oriented and should integrate learning, working and living. They should be concerned essentially with basic education, skills training and in providing up-to-date news and information as shown in figure 5.4. The ATLP-CE concept of community based centres is, however, somewhat broader than that envisaged by the model given in figure 5.4. A community-based learning centre under ATLP-CE should not only be a local provider of the activities suggested by Masang (Figure 5.4) but should facilitate access to a full range of CE activities including programmes catering for quality of life improvement, post-literacy, equivalency, individual interests and so on (see Chapter 6). It should be both a direct provider and a link with all other local providers. It should encourage both unstructured and structured learning by all adult citizens. It should help individuals set and achieve learning objectives appropriate to their individual stages of personal and societal development and it should ensure that this process continues throughout life. This role for community based learning centre under ATLP-CE is highly professional and although each centre should be managed by the local people it serves it should have access to well qualified continuing educational advisers level B field consultants, programme designers and so on. It should be part of a provincial/national CE network and have effective and efficient links with all relevant local providers. Its functions should be as set out in Part I Section D of this chapter. 3 Masang, Boonlerd. A Proposal for lifelong education system at the village level in Thailand. Hamburg: UNESCO Institute for Education, 1987.45 Council of Community Sponsoring Organizations Educational Planning Administration Consultants Educational Diagnosticians Educational Planning Consultants Educational Diagnosticians School College Business Factory Firm Market Health Agency Park Satellite Centre 1 Individual Satellite Centre 2 Resource Persons Educational Planning Satellite Centre A LIFELONG LEARNING RESOURCE SYSTEM (LEARNING COMMUNITY) Linkage among Resource Centres Linkage with content resources Figure 5.3: Comprehensive Centres for lifelong learning as proposed by Malcom Knowles. Note each main centre has four satellite centres and all link together all agencies of the learning society. Professional Society Consultants Educational Diagnosticians Religious Institutions Labour Media Union Government Agency Voluntary Organization Farm Lifelong Learning Resource Centre Educational Planning Consultants Educational Diagnosticians Trade Association Educational Planning Consultants Home Educational Diagnosticians Satellite Centre 3 4 46 C. Guidelines for a Community Based Learning Centre On the following pages a checklist is provided on aspects of a community-based learning centre. This checklist gives general guidelines for those considering establishing or needing to strengthen existing ATLP-CE type community based learning centres. For further aspects of learning centres consitant with the approach advocated under ATLP-CE readers are refered to the Final Report of the First Workshop on the Development of the UNESCO Co-action Learning Centre Programme Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 12-18 November 1992. This workshop was co-sponsored by (i) Asia and the Pacific Federation of UNESCO Club and Assiciations (ii) UNESCO National Association of Malaysia and (iii) National Federation of UNESCO Associations in Japan. 47 Figure 5.4: The key functions of community-based Learning Centre (After Boonlerd Masang) based on a general model used by the Department of Non-Formal Education in Thailand. Skills Training Basic Education Up-to-date news and information PROCESS CHECKLIST 1. Functions 1.1 Provide a place for learning A repository of learning materials A place to learn how to learn and how to live A place with a positive welcoming environment for learning A place to help individuals achieve their learning objectives A place which encourages people to read 1.2 A provider of CE programmes Basic education Post literacy Equivalency programmes Income generating activities Quality of life programmes 1.3 A link with all other local CE providers Linkage with PCCCE (level B) Member of CE network Inventory of all CE activities available locally Linkages with all providers Links with formal education institutions 1.4 General Community Functions Community meeting place News centre Sporting centres Hobby centre A place for cultural activities Day care centre for families A place for cooking and sharing of food 1.5 A place to upgrade skills A training centre Place for sharing ideas and solving problems A counselling and guidance facility Vocational programme provision48 1.6 A Centre for Coordinating Services of Government Agencies Health centre Family planning centre Political meeting place Agricultural extension Conservation, forestry, soils, education centres Housing advisory service Others 2. Getting a Centre started A centre may be initiated by any of the following: Local leaders may initiate LC as a perceived need Non-formal education system of government may stimulate interest Volunteers initiate Formal Education Sectors perceive need Private Sector initiative NGO’s initiative Religious institutions initiative 3. Resources Needed 3.1 Learning resources Individualized materials Multi-media resources Posters and charts Software for electronic and other systems Radio and television receivers Textbooks/reference books Leaflets/booklets Novels Duplicated notes Quizzes and tests Games (educational) Maps globes, etc. Newspapers/magazines 3.2 Learning support facilities Adequate budget Writing materials Typewriters Graphic art supplies 49 Public address system Loud hailers Transport facilities Duplicating/photocopying machines Notice boards First aid facilities Health-oriented facilities Audio-visual equipment Workshop equipment Computers Word processors Recreational/sporting equipment 3.3 Buildings and Furnishings Teaching areas Library/bookstore Flexible furnishings Informal furnishings Display areas Social areas Quiet areas Domestic spaces (cooking, eating, toilets, etc.) Appropriate floor coverings Good lighting Workshop Storage facilities 3.4 Human Resources Management committee General instructors, teachers, facilitators Access to specialized providers Support workers (typists, cleaners etc.) Access to field CE consultants and other B level personnel 4. Sources of Support Government grants Private sector donations NGO sources Donations from public Gifts from learners Fees from learners Self-made products and income from sales Use of volunteers Loans from libraries Rental systems Income-generating projects of the Centre 50 Donations from religious organizations Fund-raising campaigns Membership drives International funding 5. Institutions which could become centres Community halls/village halls NFE (existing) Centres Primary schools Libraries Reading Centres Religious Centres Cooperatives CE Centres in universities Local government agencies NGO’s offices Commercial organization’s spaces Sports club/social clubs Government agencies Vocational Education Centres Private houses Factories Farms Natural reserves (parks) Museums Cultural Centres Publishing houses Village newspaper reading Centres Entertainment Centres 6. Some characteristics of an effective centre Entry point for all available CE programmes Adequate learning materials Positive learning environment Multi-purpose Open access/caters for all Owned and managed by people Involves formal, non-formal and informal subsectors Methods appropriate for learners Good facilitators Individualized approach Multi-media approach Flexible for local needs Strategically located Adequate recurrent budget Extension programmes available Involvement of local agencies/providers 51 Part of network/links with level B Regular programmes Low cost to learners Dynamic approach D. Conclusion In establishing an infrastructure for continuing education the central aim is to ensure that a comprehensive range of appropriate and effective opportunities for lifelong learning is available for al adults. This means that a full range of programmes and activities should be available in each locality. To facilitate access and utilization, local community based learning centres become a key to success. Local people should perceive their learning centres not just as places to meet and to learn basics, but as an entry point to a whole system of CE which can cater for all their learning needs throughout life. Seen from the perspective of the individual learner, an infrastructure for CE is in place to service the needs of the people: individual citizens; single families; small groups, and local communities. There is, however, another perspective. Individual needs most also relate to the needs and concerns of the society and of the nation as a whole. The infrastructure therefore must also ensure that continuing education grows in support of national development policies and plans, and the needs of individuals are balanced against those of the entire nation. Ideas and policies therefore must flow freely from bottom-up and from top-down and the infrastructure must allow for creative diversity as well as focused development. 52 Chapter 6 STRATEGIES FOR IMPLEMENTING CONTINUING EDUCATION PROGRAMMES ADMINISTRATIVE ASPECTS A. Introduction The overall stages is the implementation of a coherent system of continuing education in a particular country have been reviewed in Chapters 4 and 5. They involved (i) the integration of continuing education in the national socio-economic development plan; (ii) establishment of or strengthening an existing national body for co-ordinating continuing education programmes; (iii) setting up or upgrading an existing infrastructure for continuing education programmes; and (iv) establishment of a mechanism for administering the various types of continuing education programmes. In Chapter 5 an infrastructure which coordinated activities at three levels (i) national (ii) provincial and (iii) local was advocated. It was noted that this corresponds to the three levels of personnel provided for under ATLP Level A: Senior Administrators and Policy Makers [National level] Level B: Provincial/District Supervisors; Trainers of Trainers Level C: Trainers or presenters [Local level] As in the case of basic literacy programmes a continuing education infrastructure requires clear management, coordination and evaluation policies at national level (level A). At provincial level (level B) it requires well organized networking, training and supervision and an effective and efficient system of administration. At local level (level C) there is need for effective institutions, agencies and individuals to actually provide direct continuing education opportunities and a system of supervisors and field consultants to monitor and upgrade all aspects of the programmes. The precise administrative policies and responsibilities to be developed at each level would vary according to the types of continuing education programmes involved. For example, post-literacy programmes have specific purposes and approaches which are in marked contrast to programmes concerned with improvement in overall quality of life or in the promotion of individual interests for personal growth. 53 This chapter presents basic checklists of administrative policies and strategies for each of the six types of continuing education programmes as defined in Chapter I Section D. B. Strategies for Post-Literacy Promotion Programmes (PLPs) DEFINITION: Post-Literacy Programmes aim to maintain and enhance basic literacy, numeracy and problem solving skills, giving individuals s u fficient general basic work skills enabling them to function effectively in their societies. Since post-literacy promotion programmes are concerned with maintaining and enhancing basic literacy, numeracy and problem solving skills so as to ensure social effectiveness they have many administrative features in common with basic literacy programmes as catered for by ATLP. They require a sensitive policy making system at level A; good literacy training, networking and supervisory systems at level B and effective literacy classes at level C. What is especially needed, however, is an upgrading of the skills of literacy personnel to enable them to deal with more sophisticated aspects of literacy such as advanced reading skills, creative writing and problem solving. The following box lists some of the administrative strategies and policies which should be promoted at national, provincial and local levels for these types of activities. I. POST-LITERACY PROMOTION PROGRAMMES National level 1. Integrating post-literacy programmes with other development initiatives by strengthening linkages between agencies/organizations, both government and nongovernment, involved in social services and development programmes. 2. Reinforcing pre-literacy, literacy and post-literacy programmes as an expansion of the ATLP approach by providing varied modes and opportunities through multisectoral linkages. 3. Improving the internal efficiency of post-literacy programmes by instituting policy measures and development programmes geared towards the effective delivery of post-literacy promotion programmes at all levels. 4. Giving increased emphasis to the needs of special groups of learners, such as women, cultural sub-communities and the disabled, by providing post-literacy programmes suited to their needs. 5. Focusing on minimum essential learning needs for the meaningful and productive life of adults in terms of content (knowledge) and psychological processes (adult learning). 54 6. Developing a training plan for post-literacy teachers and supervisors. 7. Monitoring and evaluating post-literacy programmes at national level especially the promotion of input studies in relation to national development policies. Provincial Level 1. Reflecting and implementing all aspects of national policy at provincial and local levels. 2. Training post-literacy teachers and supervisors including extension workers from various sectoral agencies to complement the work of school teachers and others from the formal educational sector. 3. Strengthening supportive programmes like mobile libraries and provision of rural newspapers, books and other development materials. 4. Enhancing/improving post-literacy training programmes and activities by: 4.1 Developing varied teaching-learning materials and methodologies appropriate to clientele needs. 4.2 Using non-traditional delivery modes e.g. correspondence programmes, distance learning, mass media, etc. 4.3 Integrating «learning», «working» and «living» at community level for an environment conducive to «whole of life» learning. 4.4 Utilizing local resources and relevant teaching aids. 5. Strengthening linkages between involved agencies at the provincial level. 6. Monitoring and evaluating provincial post-literacy programmes. Local Level 1. Ensuring the involvement of local people in planning, implementing and evaluating post-literacy programmes. 2. Utilizing local people as instructors or teachers in post-literacy programmes. 3. Assessing local resources. 4. Organizing post-literacy programmes at all appropriate local venues 5. Encouraging volunteerism at local level. 55 C. Strategies for Equivalency Programmes (EPs) DEFINITION: Equivalency Programmes are designed as alternative education programmes equivalent to existing formal general or vocational education. Since Equivalency Programmes as part of continuing education provide alternative education equivalent to upper primary and above, they have many administrative features in common with both basic literacy programmes and with the formal educational system. From an administrative point of view a system of continuing education should ensure that there are sufficient numbers and types of educational agencies providing such programmes; that an equitable system of accreditation is developed and that appropriate records of certification are developed and maintained. II. EQUIVALENCY PROGRAMMES National Level 1. Defining the standard competencies for post-literacy appropriate for entry into defined grades of education. 2. Providing for certification of equivalent accreditation by appropriate bodies such as Academic Award Boards or selected universities and colleges. 3. Establishing a comprehensive system of locating, identifying, monitoring, evaluating and accrediting those post-literacy programmes which prepare for entry or transfer into specified levels of education. 4. Formulating guidelines for national policy on recognition of various alternative programmes and records. Provincial Level 1. Advocating equivalency programmes/and reflecting national policy at provincial level. 2. Preparing rules and regulations for equivalency. 3. Organizing the development and administration of equivalency tests. 4. Developing and administering a counselling and advisory service at provincial level based on a data bank. 56 Local Level 1. Promoting equivalency programmes. 2. Organizing equivalency courses. 3. Developing a local advisory service on equivalency opportunities. D. Strategies for Income Generating Programmes (IGPs) DEFINITION: Income-Generating Programmes help participants acquire or upgrade vocational skills and enable them to conduct income-generating activities. IGPs are those vocational continuing education programmes delivered in a variety of contexts and which are directed in particular towards those people who are currently not selfsufficient in a modern world, that is those persons at or below the poverty line. Programmes for generating income are especially significant in rural areas, for women, and for unemployed youth. While vocational courses are well developed in most countries within technical colleges and polytechnics, formal education alone cannot meet the demand or cater for the variety of opportunities required by the community. Administratively, however, there are some points in common between policies and strategies developed in formal technical and vocational education and in income generating programmes within the context of continuing education. For example, both types of approach depend for success on careful market analysis. III. INCOME GENERATING PROGRAMMES National Level 1. Examining national policies for agriculture, trade and industry, tourism etc. present and prospective to identify labour requirements. 2. Surveying the labour market situation; levels of manpower skills; per cent of population joining labour market; labour demand; existing resources and resource potential; existing agencies offering IGPs. 3. Analyzing the national Human Resource Development Plan (HRD) to identify needs and gaps. 4. Promoting awareness programmes to build favourable attitudes towards national policy. 5. Promoting guidelines for the development of curriculum and teaching/learning materials for IGPs. 57 6. Developing guidelines for staff development e.g. training in needs assessment, curriculum development, and so on. 7. Developing guidelines for vocational guidance and counselling. 8. Developing guidelines for co-ordination and networking. 9. Monitoring and evaluating all aspects of the programme, including guidelines for evaluation of IGPs in line with the HRD Plan. 10. Developing guidelines for marketing IGP products. 11. Creating or utilizing an existing National Implementing Co-ordinating Body/ Committee. 12. Establishing a mechanism for mobilising resources financial and human for IGPs. 13. Utilizing mass media for the delivery of IGPs. 14. Developing guidelines for the development of R & D for IGPs. Provincial Level 1. Interpreting and adapting all national policies and strategies in the context of provincial situations and needs. 2. Establishing a provincial implementing and co-ordinating body/committee. 3. Training IGP/CE personnel. 4. Providing support to institutions implementing IGPs. 5. Advocating expansion of IGPs. 6. Involving NGOs/Private sector in IGP activities. Local Level 1. Establishing a mechanism to ensure local people’s involvement in planning, implementing and evaluating community programmes and activities. 2. Promoting guidance and counselling services, especially on vocational and marketing issues. 3. Encouraging local participation in the programme with emphasis on disadvantaged groups. 4. Devising local marketing strategies. 58 5. Assessing local needs, wants and resources in regard to training and marketing. 6. Devising programmes and learning materials to suit local needs and situations. 7. Utilizing local experts as teachers, especially those representing successful income generating activities. 8. Encouraging volunteerism. 9. Establishing linkages between local income-generating activities. E. Strategies for Quality of Life Improvement Programmes (QLIPs) DEFINITION: Quality of Life Improvement Programmes aim to equip learners and the community with that essential knowledge, attitudes, values and skills to enable them to improve quality of life as individuals and as members of the community. In Quality of Life Improvement Programmes the emphasis tends to be broader and more all encompassing than some other types of continuing education. This is because, by definition, such programmes aim to equip the community as a whole with essential knowledge attitudes and skills which are universally required for adequate functioning in society and which foster essential improvement in life styles and living standards. The programmes are thus universal in target and comprehensive in terms of basic social functionality. Administratively, therefore, the main aim is to mobilize all relevant agencies, instrumentalities and resources which will ensure that all citizens have access to these types of activities. IV. QUALITY OF LIFE IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMMES National Level 1. Specifying QLIP indicators at family level for all citizens. 2. Identifying GO’s and NGO’s involved in activities related to QLIP and promoting co-ordination between them. 3. Identifying essential knowledge, attitudes, values and skills to promote QLIPs. 4. Formulating guidelines for planning and implementating relevant QLIPs for different target groups with special emphasis on women and other disadvantaged groups. 5. Identifying and assessing existing programmes addressing QLIP needs and concerns. 6. Designing a training plan for QLIP personnel. 59 7. Utilizing multi-media for advocacy and delivery of QLIP programmes 8. Devising a mechanisms for mobilizing resources, e.g. youth groups, business institutions, industry, and so on. 9. Monitoring and evaluating all phases of the programmes. Provincial Level 1. Adapting national strategies and plans to meet provincial needs and programme requirements. 2. Setting up or utilising existing institutional mechanisms. 3. Mobilizing NGO’s and community organisations to offer QLIPs. 4. Selecting and training QLIP personnel. 5. Encouraging community involvement and volunteerism, including youth groups in QLIPs. Local Level 1. Encouraging and motivating clientele groups to participate in QLIPs. 2. Assessing local needs through a participatory processes. 3. Utilizing maximum local resources for QLIPs. 4. Devising programmes to meet local needs. 5. Establishing a mechanism to ensure local participation in programme planning, implementation and evaluation. F. Strategies for Individual Interest Programmes (IIP) DEFINITION: Individual Interest Promotion Programmes provide opportunity for individuals to participate in and learn about their chosen social, cultural, spiritual, health, physical and artistic interests. In contrast to Quality of Life Programmes which aim to establish a common base line of effective living for all citizens, individual interest activities within continuing education cater for each persons special concerns and personal objectives. They may be leisure time interests such as sports or hobbies; they may be related to cognitive growth, (study of a particular subject for example) or they may cater for social needs and so on. They promote personal growth in areas of specialized interest. The main thrust in the administration of such programmes is to encourage the provision of as wide a range of activities as possible reflecting the highly diverse interests of the community. Because many agencies may provide special interest activities an important 60 administrative role is to make sure such agencies are known to potential clientele. V. INDIVIDUAL INTEREST PROGRAMMES National Level 1. Preparing and maintaining an inventory of agencies offering special interest CE programmes. 2. Disseminating information through mass media. 3. Encouraging creation of special interest groups and other self-initiated programmes and activities. 4. Providing technical support to GOs and NGOs involved in IIPs. 5. Publicizing benefits gained from participation in special interest CE programmes, e.g., case studies, testimonials and so on. Provincial Level 1. Adapting the national IIP plans and strategies to provincial and local needs. 2. Advocating participation in IIP. 3. Encouraging GOs and NGOs to undertake IIP. 4. Creating learning centres or utilizing existing infrastructures, especially formal school facilities, for IIP activities. Local Level 1. Creating a favorable conducive atmosphere for individuals to participate in activities in pursuit of their personal interests. 2. Developing advanced reading skills and inculcating a reading habit through provision of appropriate and well written reading materials relevant to the interests of individuals. 3. Making available national and provincial resources for local programmes. 4. Encouraging people to utilize leisure time constructively. 61 G. Strategies for Future Oriented Programmes (FOs) DEFINITION: Future Oriented Programmes give workers, professionals, regional and national community leaders, villagers, businessmen and planners new skill, knowledge and techniques to adapt themselves and their organizations to growing social and technological changes. While all types of continuing education have national, societal or personal development aspects, some programmes are needed which directly assist individuals and organizations adapt and respond to social and technological change. In administering such programmes the main focus is to see that continuing education is in line with overall plans for national socio-economic development; to identify and support agencies and individuals with forward looking ideas, and to help organizations and individuals who perceive the need for change or who are involved in change. VI. FUTURE ORIENTED PROGRAMMES National Level 1. Integrating future-oriented CE programmes into the socio-economic development plan of the country. 2. Instituting research and development for the expansion of future-oriented CE. 3. Formulating policy in regard to future oriented Continuing Education. 4. Strengthening the Continuing Education network especially by anticipating future growth points and identifying and supporting effective change agencies. 5. Encouraging development of appropriate technology. 6. Encouraging technology transfer by fostering inter-country linkages. 7. Assessing and upgrading human, institutional and financial resources. 8. Fostering R & D in technological development as input into FO Continuing Education. 9. Preparing guidelines for generating wider involvement of business, industries, entrepreneurs and labour organisations in FO Continuing Education. 10. Promoting systematic organisational change and renewal and linking this to the FO Continuing Education system. 11. Developing «think-tanks» for future social and economic growth in relation to FO Continuing Education. 62 Provincial Level 1. Adapting and integrating all national policies, strategies and plans relevant to FO CE at the provincial level. 2. Establishing provincial implementing and co-ordinating bodies/ committees. 3. Ensuring access to new information by all FO Continuing Education providers in the province. 4. Providing future-oriented training for FO Continuing Education personnel. 5. Developing relevant instructional materials for FO Continuing Education personnel. 6. Strengthening vertical and horizontal co-ordination. 7. Receiving and coordinating data from local levels about social and technological trends and about the effectiveness of future oriented CE. Local Level 1. Preparing guidelines for local growth and development for implementing FO Continuing Education. 2. Identifying local change agents and encouraging their involvement in FO Continuing Education. 3. Encouraging self-initiated learning and local management of initiatives in FO Continuing Education. 4. Providing regular training and re-training of local FO Continuing Education personnel. 5. Developing/adapting learning materials which reflect latest ideas and future developments. 6. Monitoring and evaluating future oriented FO Continuing Education at the local level. H. Conclusion The administrative strategies and policies as outlined in this chapter provide only very broad guidelines which would need to be interpreted and adapted according to the needs and circumstances of each Member State. A most important aspect which all countries need to keep in mind, however, is that in planning and administering programmes of continuing education national socio-economic development plans should provide a general framework. Since continuing education is, by definition, the opportunity for adults to engage in life-long education after they have completed primary schooling or its equivalent, it is important that the learning 63 accumulated in the society as a whole, will directly contribute to its planned growth and development. A second important aspect is that administrators should also view continuing education as a mechanism for human resource development and not merely as an agency for economic and material growth. This implies that strategies and policies should be humanistic in orientation. A careful balance needs to be maintained between the needs and aspirations of individuals and the needs and aspirations of the nation as a whole. A further point is that administration of continuing education is both from the top-down and from the bottom-up. General national policies and strategies must be reflected downward at all levels. These policies should be supportive and catalytic not coercive or authoritarian. At the same time the needs, wants and concerns of local organizations and individuals need to be catered f o r. In particular the devolution of management should be promoted. Organizations and individuals should be encouraged to establish agencies and activities for continuing education, to set their own learning objectives and to accept responsibility for their own learning. Continuing Education is for the people and it should be managed by them. 64 Chapter 7 CLIENTELE, DELIVERY SYSTEMS AND LEARNING RESOURCES FOR CONTINUING EDUCATION A. Introduction The various types of continuing education programmes defined and briefly outlined in Chapter 6 each has its own characteristics in regard to target clientele, its delivery system (modality) and the resources required. This chapter identifies these characteristics, presenting them in a checklist format. By clientele is meant the people for whom the programmes are intended. In the case of Post Literacy Programmes, for instance, the clientele are likely to be those who are only basically literate and school dropouts and semiliterate adults will probably form the largest groups. Such people generally lack advanced reading skills, frequently are unemployed or are otherwise socially disadvantaged, and usually have low incomes. It is important to define and characterise the clientele in this way in order to plan the most appropriate delivery system or modality for them and determine the types of resources they need. By delivery system or modality is meant the mode by which the programme is presented perhaps in a classroom type setting using various face-to-face teaching methods, through a correspondence course or through individual self-monitored study. Delivery systems may also involve more specialized and less conventional approaches. For example, in Income Generating Programmes, hobby groups could be established, on-job training provided or exhibitions and product or trade fairs mounted, to name just a few of the possibilities. The modality selected must be suitable for the clientele involved and for the types of activities to be included in the programme. As an example, in the case of future oriented programmes where the clientele are likely to be people who need help with implementing change, delivery systems which ensure access to new knowledge and technologies are likely to be successful. By «resource» is meant the personnel needed; the learning materials; support items such as venues, furnishings and equipment, and administrative resources such as record keeping systems. Each type of continuing education programme has its own resource needs consistent with its objectives and scope. Apart from the issue of «types of programmes» as defined and described in Chapter 1 and Chapter 6 there is another type of classification of continuing education activities which should be taken into consideration when reviewing clientele; delivery systems and learning resources. This classification, based on a model developed by G. Roger Snell, is given in figure 7.11. 1 Snell, G. Roger The Providers Perspective for Research on Life-long Learning Paper presented as part of a symposium entitled: «Research Perspectives on the Adult Years of Life-long Learning», AERAAnnual Meeting, March 27-31,1978, Toronto, Canada. P.2. 65 Figure 7.1 shows that adult learning opportunities (i.e. continuing education activities) can be thought of either as being (a) deliberately planned with learning objectives in mind or (b) as random or unplanned. Most unplanned learning in incidental or at least casual and without clear-cut objectives. More deliberately planned experiences and activities may occur in formal, non-formal or informal education. They are of two types: (AI) those provided by the learner himself or herself or by an informal self-initiated learning group; and (A2) those provided by an agent (institution, organisation, person) other than the learner. Self-provided learning opportunities (At) include learning projects2 that are planned and directed by a learner or group of learners with minimal outside assistance. Learning opportunities provided by others (type A2) 2 As defined by Tough, Allen The Adult’s learning projects: a fresh approach to theory and practice in adult learning. Research in Education Series No. 1. Toronto, Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, 1971. 66 LIFELONG LEARNING INFANT/CHILD LEARNING ADULT LEARNING ADOLESCENT/ YOUTH LEARNING ADULT LEARNING OPPORTUNITIES (A) DELIBERATE/ PLANNED (B) RANDOM/ UNPLANNED (A1) (A2) PROVIDED BYADULT PROVIDED BY LEARNER OR LEARNING INSTITUTION, GROUPWITH MINIMAL ORGANIZATION, OR INTERVENTION FROM PERSON OTHER THAN OUTSIDE SOURCES ADULT LEARNER OR (Informal) LEARNING GROUP (Formal or Non-Formal) Figure 7.1 A classification scheme for continuing education activities. (Based on G. Roger Snell, 1978). Note that as defined orderAPPEAL, continuing education clients include both adults and post-primary school youth. include courses, programmes and other organized activities planned and directed by someone other than the learner or the learning group, by some formal or non-formal educational institution, or by some basically non-educational institution (e.g. business or industry) and by groups with a designated teacher or resource person. This idea was also discussed in Chapter 5 see figure 5.1. The importance of these ideas by Roger Snell is that they open our thinking about the range of continuing education activities away from programmes and courses alone. This idea is fully consistent institutionally based with the UNESCO concept of a learning society in which all agencies are seen to be instrumentalities for learning. This type of classification of continuing education activities should be kept in mind when interpreting the checklists presented below in sections B to G of this chapter. Some of the programme types may contain some random unplanned elements in balance with more that are deliberately planned. Some of the deliberately planned activities within a particular programme type may be provided by the learners themselves and some by others. Delivery systems and resources, therefore, have been kept flexible and varied to cater for these various approaches. B. Post Literacy Promotion Programmes (PLPs) Since these programmes are mainly to strengthen and build on basic literacy skills the most appropriate delivery systems will have some features in common with those for literacy training activities as covered by ATLP. In addition, however, the approach taken and the resources required should cater for individual differences and should promote self-initiated learning, self-pacing and reduced dependency on formal teaching. In the checklist below contact sessions, self-learning and distance learning are noted as possible delivery systems. In the case of the contact sessions it is important to stress that the methods must be appropriate for the clientele and for the purpose of the programme. For example, face-to-face sessions should not involve conventional «from the front» teaching but should be based on group activities, peer tutoring, supervised self-paced learning and so on. Most of the activities in the types of programmes are highly structured and are usually, but not always, the responsibility of formal or non-formal education. I. CHECKLIST FOR POST-LITERACY PROMOTION PROGRAMMES 1.1 INTENDED FOR: 1.2 WHO GENERALLY: 1.1.1 People only basically literate 1.2.1 Lack advanced reading skills 1.1.2 School dropouts 1.2.2 Are disadvantaged/ unemployed 1.1.3 Semi-literates 1.2.3 Belong to low income groups 67 1.3 DELIVERY SYSTEMS 1.4 RESOURCES NEEDED 1.3.1 Contact session 1.4.1 Graded/programmed (Face-to-face) learning materials 1.3.2 Self-learning 1.4.2 Teachers/Tutors/Facilitators 1.3.3 Distance Learning 1.4.3 Support learning facilities and equipment 1.3.4 Mixed approach i.e. 1.4.4 Mastery tests combinations of 1.3.1 to 1.3.3 1.4.5 Multi-media materials 1.4.6 Diagnostic materials 1.4.7 Individualized records C. Equivalency Programmes (EPs) Equivalency programmes form a somewhat specialized category of continuing education since they generally seek the same types of outcomes as the formal system but do so by alternative means. In some countries, equivalency programmes are thought of very flexibly to include alternative ways of obtaining any form of certification or accreditation within the formal non-formal or even the informal subsectors. In other countries they are limited to alternative ways of achieving a specified level of formal education only. Some equivalency programmes therefore are very broad in scope and others may be confined to only one subsector. An example of a single subsector equivalency programme, in this case the university subsector, is the system of «life» credits allowed by a particular network of colleges in the United States. In this example work in the informal subsector receives credit for degrees and diplomas awarded by the formal subsector. Probably the most common types of equivalency programmes however are those which provide alternatives to formal primary and secondary schooling. II. CHECKLIST FOR EQUIVALENCY PROGRAMMES 2.1 INTENDED FOR : 2.2 WHO GENERALLY : 2.1.1 Literate adults seeking 2.2.1 Are employed formal qualifications by alternative means 2.2.2 Are out-of-school youths/ adults 2.1.2 Primary school graduates 2.2.3 Are ambitious and selfmotivated 68 2.1.3 High scholl dropouts 2.2.4 Are seeking accreditation for employment and/or promotion 2.2.5 Cannot or are unwilling to attend formal education 2.3 DELIVERY SYSTEMS 2.4 RESOURCES NEEDED 2.3.1 Contact session 2.4.1 Graded/programmed (Face-to-face) learning materials 2.3.2 Self-learning 2.4.2 Teachers/tutors/facilitators 2.3.3 Distance learning 2.4.3 Learning support facilities and equipment 2.3.4 Counselling programmes 2.4.4 Mastery tests 2.3.5 Mixed approach, i.e. combinations 2.4.5 Multi-media materials of 2.3.1 to 2.3.4 2.4.6 Diagnostic materials 2.4.7 Individualized records 2.4.8 Standardized tests 2.4.9 Acceptance certificates 2.4.10 Certification body/authority 2.4.11 Curriculum materials for specific equivalency programmes or courses of study 2.4.13 Guidance and counselling materials D. Income-Generating Programmes (IGPs) Delivery systems for these types of programmes are very varied and can be provided through the formal, non-formal and informal subsectors. Certainly most of the activities would be self initiated with the learning objectives set by individual participants. An important dimension, however, is the need to support the programme by a good counselling and advisory service. Advocacy is also important and field CE consultants should be alert to identify potential providers 69 and to encourage participation by individuals seeking to generate income. III. CHECKLIST FOR INCOME-GENERATING PROGRAMMES 3.1 INTENDED FOR : 3.2 WHO GENERALLY 3.1.1 Employed, seeking extra 3.2.1 Are youths and adults at income or self-fulfillment varying levels of literacy with specific interests/needs 3.1.2 Prospective entrepreneurs 3.2.2 Are highly motivated to improve their life situations 3.1.3 Those seeking re-training or alternative jobs 3.1.4 Specific groups seeking extra or basic income, e.g. women, housewives, unemployed, students/dropouts, minority groups; handicaped, etc. 3.1.5 Members of co-operatives 3.3 DELIVERY SYSTEMS 3.4 RESOURCES NEEDED 3.3.1 Contact sessions (Face-to-face) 3.4.1 Outputs/products of IGPs 3.3.2 Self-learning 3.4.2 Facilities/tools/equipment 3.3.3 Distance learning 3.4.3 Raw materials 3.3.4 Mixed approaches of 3.3.1 to 3.3.3 3.4.4 Expertise/resources 3.3.5 Apprenticeship programmes 3.4.5 Training materials 3.3.6 Workshops 3.4.6 Individual logbook/diaries 3.3.7 Interest groups 3.4.7 Local case studies 3.3.8 Hobby groups 3.4.8 Information on changing world of work 3.3.9 «Sandwich» courses 3.4.9 Resources for managing 3.3.10 Study tours/visits income wisely 3.3.11 On-the-job training 3.3.12 Guidance and counselling 70 3.3.13 Co-operative programmes 3.3.14 Exhibitions/fairs 3.3.15 Project-based learning 3.3.16 Sheltered workshops for the handicapped 3.3.17 Entrepreneurship training E. Quality of Life Improvement Programmes (QLIPs) Since the focus in these types of programme is on upgrading the living standards and life styles of all citizens to at least an acceptable level of development, the clientele obviously includes all youth and adults. A key aspect is that the scope of the programme, the types of delivery systems and the resources provided should be consistent with national development plans. The programme should penetrate all levels and all subsectors of the community. Every citizen should have ready access and this implies the development of local community based delivery points and of varied activities to satisfy the needs of all categories of society. IV. CHECKLIST FOR QUALITY OF LIFE IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMMES 4.1 INTENDED FOR 4.2 WHO GENERALLY 4.1.1 All youths and adults 4.2.1 Are literate? in developing societies 4.2.2 Include categories of people with specials needs in relation to development plans. 4.3 DELIVERY SYSTEMS 4.4 RESOURCES NEEDED As in 1.3 but delivered through the following: 4.3.1 Community development 4.4.1 Appropriate reading materials actions/approaches 4.3.2 Campaigns for improved living 4.4.2 Mass media 4.3.3 Cultural activities 4.4.3 Community groups 4.3.4 Networks of community 4.4.4 National development consultants plans/programmes 4.3.5 Contests and competitions 4.4.5 Religious institutions 71 4.3.6 Learning Centres 4.4.6 Reading centres, libraries, community halls, and so on 4.4.7 Ideal models of lifestyle and standards F. Individual Interest Programmes (llPs) In many respects programmes which cater for the individual interests of adults and which promote their personal development should be the main core of any system of continuing education. Personal development and the development and interests should occur throughout life. Because the activities under this programme, and hence the clientele, delivery systems and resources, are almost limitless in potential and scope, the cumulative output contributes very considerably to the overall educational development of the society and hence to its economic development. Individual interest programmes are always undertaken to meet specific learning objectives determined by the learners. Providers, on the other hand, must be sensitive and responsive to patterns of interest in the community and be willing to offer what participants need and want. V. CHECKLIST FOR INDIVIDUAL INTEREST PROGRAMMES 5.1 INTENDED FOR 5.2 WHO GENERALLY 5.1.1 All youths and adults 5.2.1 Are literate 5.2.2 Are specifically motivated 5.3 DELIVERY SYSTEMS 5.4 RESOURCES 5.3.1 All types 5.4.1 According to individual interests and wants G. Future Oriented Programmes (FOs) While all activities under continuing education cause change (growth) in individuals, groups and organisations and in society as a whole and therefore have a future orientation, special programmes should be provided which focus on the nature, agencies and processes of change itself. Their aim should be to facilitate planned change for a better world. The main clientele are therefore those needing to change or are involved in change or who are in a position to affect change. The delivery systems should have a future perspective and orientation and the resources needed should be forward looking. Future oriented programmes could be provided by the formal, non-formal and informal subsectors but the latter probably has a major role. Activities could be structured or unstructured and structured activities could be either self or provider initiated. 72 Future oriented programmes have a key role to play in both human resource development and economic development as they provide inputs which ensure meaningful and effective growth.VI. CHECKLIST FOR FUTURE ORIENTED PROGRAMMES 6.1 INTENDED FOR 6.2 WHO GENERALLY 6.1.1 All youths and adults 6.2.1 Are literate 6.1.2 Organizations and institutions 6.2.2 Have a scientific attitude 6.1.3 Publishers and other 6.2.3 Include individuals producers of communication and organizations materials needing to change or involved in change 6.1.4 Managers, planners 6.2.4 Have leadership ` community leaders potential 6.1.5 Change agents 6.3 DELIVERY SYSTEMS 6.4 RESOURCES NEEDED 6.3.1 R & D systems 6.4.1 Products of think-tanks and of future studies 6.3.2 Seminars/comparative studies 6.4.2 Research literature 6.3.3 Information networks/ 6.4.3 Science and technology communication research centres 6.3.4 Futures study systems 6.4.4 Case study materials 6.3.5 Exchange systems 6.4.5 Satellite communication resources 6.3.6 Study visits/cross 6.4.6 Electronic media national studies resources, computers, and computers software 6.3.7 Expositions 6.4.7 Arts and cultural centres 6.3.8 Computer systems 6.4.8 Museums 6.3.9 Industrial/commercial 6.4.9 Mass media training systems 73