Nursing Inquiry 2010; 17(4): 208–220 Feature Continuing nursing education policy in China and its impact on health equity Lily Dongxia Xiao Flinders University, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia Accepted for publication 22 February 2010 XIAO LD. Nursing Inquiry 2010; 17: 208–220 Continuing nursing education policy in China and its impact on health equity The aim of this study was to evaluate the mandatory continuing nursing education (MCNE) policy in China and to examine whether or not the policy addresses health equity. MCNE was instituted in 1996 in China to support healthcare reform was to include producing greater equity in health-care. However, the literature increasingly reports inequity in participation in MCNE, which is likely to have had a detrimental effect on the pre-existing discrepancies of education in the nursing workforce, and thereby failing to really address health equity. Despite a growing appeal for change, there is lack of critical reflection on the issues of MCNE policy. Critical ethnography underpinned by Habermas’ Communicative Action Theory and Giddens’ Structuration Theory were used to guide this study. Findings are presented in four themes: (i) inaccessibility of learning programs for nurses; (ii) undervaluation of workplace-based learning; (iii) inequality of the allocation of resources; and (iv) demands for additional support in MCNE from non-tertiary hospitals. The findings strongly suggest the need for an MCNE policy review based on rational consensus with stakeholders while reflecting the principles of health equity. Key words: critical theory, health policy, inequalities in health, nurse education, professional development. 
Mandatory continuing nursing education (MCNE) was instituted in 1996 in the context of healthcare reform in China in order to meet increasing demands from the public for accessible, affordable and high-quality healthcare services (CMOH 2000). The healthcare reform, based on socialist market-oriented healthcare services, was started in the 1990s during which healthcare organizations were developed into self-sustaining organizations largely initiated by means of competition in the provision of health services (Bloom and Gu 1997; Liu, Hsiao, and Eggleston 1999). However, after more than a decade-long trial of the reform, there was a realization that it had failed, with the failure mainly attributable to the growing health inequity between the rural and urban areas (World Bank 2005; Gao 2006). Meanwhile the literature relating to MCNE increasingly reports unequal learning opportunities, unequal distribution of learning resources and learning coercion (Edwards, Zhou, and Song 2001; Chen and Wu 2005), which may ultimately enlarge theses existing nursing workforce discrepancies between the rural and urban areas and therefore contribute to maintaining, or even increasing health inequity. Although China has made a great effort to reduce poverty since the economic reform of the 1980s, it still has ‘the second largest concentration of extreme poor in the world’ after India, with the majority of the poorest population living in rural areas (World Bank 2009, 17). A body of evidence shows that ‘the poorest of the poor, around the world, have the worst health’ (CSDH 2008, 31). Therefore, closing the health gap requires a government’s action. Nurses play a key role in delivering primary care and are therefore most likely to be prepared to combat povertyCorrespondence: Lily Dongxia Xiao, PhD, RN, MRCN, Lecturer in Nursing, School related diseases and health issues. This study, by reporting on of Nursing & Midwifery, Flinders University, GPO Box 2100, Adelaide, SA 5001, a study that evaluated MCNE policy and its implementation Australia. E-mail: <lily.xiao@flinders.edu.au> in China, intends to raise awareness about interweaving Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 
compared relationships between nursing education policy and health with 1480.1 in the urban area (CMOH 2009). equity through the perspective of a developing country. There was no government-sponsored basic medical cover for all citizens in China before 2007. The ‘Medical AccumulaBACKGROUND tion Scheme’ covered only employed people, with only half of the population living in cities being covered by this Public health policy is stated as ‘an explicit concern for scheme (CMOH 2008a). Eighty per cent of the population health and equity in all areas of policy and by accountability in China live in rural areas and had no medical insurance for health impact’ (WHO, cited by Baum 2008, 545). Health before the commencement in 2007 of the new medical equity is defined as ‘the absence of unfair and avoidable or insurance reform entitled ‘National Rural Cooperative Medremediable differences in health among population groups ical Scheme’ (NRCMS) (CMOH 2008b). The rebate under defined socially, economically, demographically or geothe NRCMS is still very low and people with no ability to pay graphically’ (WHO 2007, 7). MCNE policy was developed in bills for medical treatment were therefore virtually excluded China to regulate the licensing of registered nurses (RNs) from even seeking treatment (World Bank 2005; Gao 2006). for public protection (CMOH 2000). It is one of the categoAs indicated in table 2, healthcare organizations are ries of public health policy and should reflect the fundamencategorized into three levels according to their functions tal principle of health equity. and resources in the system. Tertiary hospitals are located in The Chinese healthcare system demonstrates huge urban areas and have better educated nursing staff when discrepancies in health services and resource distribution compared with non-tertiary hospitals (CMOH 2005; World between the urban and rural areas. Maternal and child morBank 2005; Gao 2006). Tertiary hospitals take advantage of tality, the government’s expenditure on healthcare, and their technological and human resources to attract consummedical insurance are key indicators used by WHO to comers, which raises revenue for their further development. pare health-care between countries or between the rural and Primary and secondary hospitals, which most need to be urban areas (Wagstaff et al. 2009). Table 1 shows consisdeveloped in order to carry out WHO’s goal of access of all tently higher maternal deaths, infant deaths and under-five to primary care, face collapse and shrinkage of services as a deaths in rural areas than in the urban areas of China result of these competitive losses. (CMOH 2009). In 2009, the government’s health expendiThere are three pathways to gain RN registration ture per capita was estimated as 348.5 Yan in the rural areas, in China: (i) 3-year study at the secondary education level; Table 1 Maternal and child mortality by urban and rural areas in 2007 and 2008 The total Urban Rural 2008 2007 2008 2007 2008 2007 Maternal deaths (1⁄100 000) 34.2 36.6 29.2 25.2 36.1 41.3 Under-five deaths (&) 18.5 18.1 7.9 9.0 22.7 21.8 Infant deaths (&) 14.9 15.3 6.5 7.7 18.4 18.6 Newborn deaths (&) 10.2 10.7 5.0 5.5 12.3 12.8 Source: Data from CMOH (2009). Table 2 Selected standards used in accreditation for different levels of hospitals The categories of healthcare organizations Location and population served Size of organization with requirement of nurses with tertiary education Primary healthcare organization Mainly serving people dwelling in villages, township 20–99 beds Secondary healthcare organization Mainly serving people dwelling in counties 100–499 beds, 30% nurse with tertiary education by 2010 Tertiary or first rank tertiary healthcare organization Mainly serving people dwelling in Above 500 beds, 50% nurses with municipals tertiary education by 2010 Source: Information from CMOH (2005). Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 209 Continuing nursing education in China 
2-year (ii) 2-year study to upgrade the secondary education to a period (Lazarus, Permaloff, and Dickson 2002). diploma; and (iii) 4-year university study for a Bachelor Mandatory continuing professional development (MCPD) degree (see table 3) (CMOH 2008b). The rural areas have a was established in the UK in 1995 (Nursing and Midlarger proportion of RNs holding a secondary education wifery Council 2002). There the RNs are required to certificate (74.4%), than those in the urban areas (57.7%) attend CNE programs for only 5 days in 3 years (or 35 (CMOH 2009). Current MCNE policy, by promoting capitalstudy hours) to keep a personal professional profile or city-centered MCNE programs, further increases the existing portfolio and to have practiced at least 100 days in the nursing workforce discrepancies that stem from the original previous 5 years (Nursing and Midwifery Council 2002). It discrepancies in education preparation. To gain the requiacknowledges any learning activities undertaken, including site 25-credits in MCNE usually requires participation informal learning and unpaid nursing practice, as long as in approved learning activities involving approximately they have the potential to provide acceptable learning 90–160 study hours (CMOH 2000), with the 25 annual credfor re-licensure. However, apart from the access, there is its categorized into two types. Type 1 is the higher type of also the question of cost, both in terms of time and credits and these cannot be replaced by Type 2 credits. affordability. Compared with the USA and the UK, RNs must attain 3–10 Type 1 credits and 15–20 Type 2 China’s annual study requirement of 90–160 hours is a credits annually. Only small numbers of medical universities huge cost to the individual, and a substantial burden for and their teaching hospitals, which are mainly in capital a developing country. cities, are accredited to provide Type 1 programs. In addiThere is an argument that rational decision-making for tion only tertiary hospitals have the authority to offer Type 2 public policy formulation should be based on ‘a comprehencredits. All non-tertiary hospitals have been completely sive analysis of all alternatives and their consequences’ (Hill excluded as program providers. 2005, 146). Evidence utilized to support decision-making Currently, these credit requirements cannot be met by should be clearly articulated in a sociopolitical context. the majority of RNs. Type 1 programs require fees for Values, beliefs and interests held by policy-makers all have a registration, and money for transport, accommodation and very strong impact on decision-making (Baum 2008). In a considerable study leave. Only nursing administrators, power-asymmetric society, how these policy-makers share valmainly from the tertiary hospitals, are able to enroll in these ues, beliefs and common interests with multiple stakeholders programs with their organizations’ support (Chen, Xu, and will largely determine how well the policy works in that counWang 2003). Most RNs have never attended a Type 1 protry. Debate and consultation with reference groups are gram. RNs employed by non-tertiary hospitals are not even common practices used to support rational and inclusive able to meet Type 2 credit requirements (Chen and decision-making in policy formulation in MCNE (Carpenito Wu 2005; Li et al. 2006). 1991; Whittaker, Carson, and Smolenski 2000). However, Continuing nursing education has been established in the MCNE policy document in China produces no informaother countries, for example in the USA, but there it tion on decision trails, or records of debates or of consultais structured quite differently. For more than a century, tion. Highly centralized and top-down policy decision26 American states have had MCNE policies (Whittaker, making is evident. Rather than rational consensus, such an Carson, and Smolenski 2000), which in contrast with the approach may indicate the use of power and ideology in Chinese system requires only 20–24 study hours over a policy development. Table 3 Registered nurses’ education in China Levels of education Pre-requisite Duration of study (full time) Qualification Secondary Junior high school 3 years Certificate Diploma Senior high school plus passing NTEE or RN plus passing ANTEE 2 years Tertiary diploma Bachelor degree Senior high school plus passing NTEE for BSN or RN plus passing ANTEE 4 or 2 years for RN BSN held diploma NTEE: National Tertiary Entry Examination; ANTEE: Adult National Tertiary Entry Examination. 210 Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd LD Xiao 
METHOD The aim of this study was to evaluate MCNE policy in China and to examine whether it is conducive to health equity. As the review of Chinese literature revealed, policy development was formed by means of a highly centralized, government-based policy process, Habermas’ Communicative Action Theory and Giddens’ Structuration Theory were applied to inform the theoretical framework guiding the practice of critical ethnography. These theories concentrate on analyzing how ideology, power and social structures either enable or inhibit social practice. The methods used were field-based study with multiple approaches for data collection, consisting of in-depth interviews, participant observation, informal conversations with program participants and a two-round Delphi study. Theoretical underpinnings A fundamental difference between interpretative ethnography and critical ethnography is that the former tries to reconstruct actors’ own world-views in their everyday lives through a field study, whereas the latter moves further to critique how ideology, power and social structures contribute to the actors’ views and practice (Carspecken 1996). A theoretical framework that builds on critical theories provides a lens to enable the researcher to consider the truth and justice underlying social practice. In this study, the theoretical framework is an integration of Giddens’ Structuration Theory and Habermas’ Communicative Action Theory. Social structure as used in Giddens’ Structuration Theory refers to ‘rules and resources’ associated with the exercise of power over people’s actions (Giddens 1984, 25). The rules in the theory are either formal (laws and legislation) or informal (tactical norms or formulae). Resources are divided into allocative and authoritative resources, with the former concerned with the material resources used to control nature, and the latter concerned with the capability of harnessing human activities. Social structures and people’s actions are not separated as ‘a dualism’, but are ‘a duality’, inseparable and shaping each other (Giddens 1984, 25). Structures enable the channeling of people’s actions in a specific manner, but, however, may also constrain people’s rationality. Therefore, the outcome of peoples’ actions will include both ‘intended consequences’ and ‘unintended consequences’. Conversely, this theory acknowledges that people have the capability, generated from a ‘reflexive form of knowledgeability’ (p. 3) to modify structures in order to improve practice. Figure 1 was developed to demonstrate the ‘duality’ relationship via means of human reflexive circles. This theory can be transferred into empirical research to examine the rules and resources set in MCNE policy, which may either enable or inhibit people’s practices through the ‘double hermeneutic of social life’ (Morrow and Brown 1994, 156): that is, the participants’ perception of the rules and resources with a fusion of the participant’s and the researcher’s perceptions. In this study, such a ‘double hermeneutic’ occurred after two rounds of Delphi study: consisting of in-depth interviews and participant observation. Structuration Theory, however, focuses mainly on the conditions of material and human capability in social practice, though with less orientation to ideology and the relations of power embedded in these conditions. Habermas believes that the unique nature of human beings as both toolmakers and language users ensures that social labor occurs under both conditions, that is, in terms of manipulating nature in the material world and communicative action in the life-world (Habermas 1972). Communicative action based on an ideal speech situation is an emancipatory form by which ‘the organization of society is linked to decision-making processes on the basis of discussion free from domination’ (Habermas 1972, 55). Communicative action is described as action aimed at reaching understanding, and is therefore the fundamental process by which to reach a rational consensus (Habermas 1979). This theory acknowledges the impact of ideology, power relations and conflict of interest on social practice. This theory can be applied to analyze how ideology and power relations impact on policy formulation and implementation. In order to reach a rational consensus for changes in MCNE based on health equity, it also informed the design of egalitarian dialog with the key stakeholders in this study. Communicative Action Theory, however, is criticized as being too utopian to be conducted in an ideological asymmetric society where ideological domination is unavoidable (Held 1980; Giddens 1984). When combined with Structuration Theory, this study (see figure 1) demonstrates the extent to which it overcame such weaknesses by producing evidence associated with the rules and resources that usually sustain ideological domination and power relations in MCNE policy development. Ideological critique Communicative action based on critical reflection and recommended changes Modify Structures (rules and Enable People’s resources), action = Unintended consequences + Intended consequences ideologies and power Inhibit Figure 1 Research design based on Structuration Theory and Communicative Action Theory Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 211 Continuing nursing education in China 
Research design Critical ethnography is developed by using interpretive ethnography with the use of multiple data collection methods through a field study. This methodology adopts a bottom-up approach to policy evaluation to reveal an aspect of the socially and politically constructed nature of the inequity in MCNE and its fundamental impact on the healthcare system. Methods used to collect data were via means of a 5-month field study in six CNE programs in China, and included observation, in-depth interviews, document analysis, informal discussions in five programs and the researcher’s reflective journals (see table 4). All participants in the study were Chinese speakers; and the researcher, who is bilingual Chinese and English and was a nurse educator in China before this study, used Chinese during data collection and translated data from Chinese to English after collection. A two-round Delphi study was conducted to engage a group of nurse leaders in discussing the issues and their perspectives on the policy changes in MCNE. The ethics committee of the university, within which the researcher was enrolled for PhD study, and the Chinese Minister of Health (CMOH) approved this study. Free informed consent was obtained before both observation and interviews. Anonymity was assured, given the context in which free speech on Chinese government policy still remains quite sensitive, even within the context of study. Using five-point Likert scale questionnaires and open-ended questions, the first round of the Delphi study was conducted before fieldwork in the six Chinese venues of the CNE programs. The questions were mainly generated from a literature review and were not specific to individual problems (see examples in table 5). The issues of concern identified in the first round of the Delphi study were further explored in the six venues of the programs, and in the second round of the Delphi study. A purposive sample of 40 nurse leaders was approached by mail with forms returned by 22 of those in the first round. Participants for the Delphi study were selected through the CMOH website of approved national-level program providers, and through informants. The response rate was 55%. These participants represented provinces of north, south, east and southwest of China. Demographic information about the participants in the Delphi study is provided in table 6. The second round of the Delphi study was conducted once the researcher had completed the field study. The researcher analyzed the data from the first round of Delphi study, and the major issues identified from the six venues of CNE programs. These results were presented for participants when conducting the second round of Delphi study. The second round of the Delphi study mainly comprised open-ended questions in which participants were encouraged to recommend changes to MCNE (see table 7). Table 4 Data collection activities Field studies (F) Informal talks Questionnaire F1: Delphi study round 1 No N⁄A No No Yes (22) F2: web-based program for XX specialty (a national program) Document analysis Observations Interviews Yes N⁄A 1 30 No F3: Advanced practice in XX, XX and XX areas (a national program) Yes Yes 2 3 No F4: Advanced practice in XX care area (a national program) Yes Yes 2 10 No F5: A training program for nursing administrators (a provincial program) Yes Yes 2 12 No F6: Nursing document: how to write appropriately (an onsite program in a secondary hospital in a rural area) Yes Yes 2 6 No F7: Be aware of factors affecting safe practice in clinical nursing (an onsite program in a secondary hospital in a urban) area Yes Yes 2 8 No F8: Delphi study round 2 No N⁄A N⁄A N⁄A Yes (22) Total 11 69 22 212 Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd LD Xiao 
Table 5 Demographic information about participants Participants No. Gender Experience in Age (mean), MCNE (mean), years Education (no.) Position (no.) years Delphi study 22 Female 35–55 (42) Diploma (12) Dean and NPD (4) 4–7 (6) Bachelor Degree (8) DoN and NPD (6) Master Degree (2) DoN and PPD (5) DoN and HPD (7) In-depth interviews 11 Female 25–46 (38) Secondary (4) DoN and NPD and PPD (4) 2–7 (4) Diploma (5) DoN and HPD (3) Bachelor Degree (2) Head Nurse (4) DoN: Director of Nursing; NPD: national program developer; PPD: province program developer; HPD: hospital program developer. In the field study, 10 program providers were invited to participate via means of a letter of invitation. Six program providers responded to the invitation and were contacted to arrange the researcher’s participation in these programs and research activities. These programs consisted of a nationallevel web-based MCNE program, two national-level MCNE programs, a provincial-level MCNE program and two hospital-level MCNE programs. The venues of the six programs crossed north, southwest and south of China. The web-based program was available for participants across China over the space of a year, and the researcher interviewed only the program providers. National and provincial programs were 5-day programs. The researcher participated in these programs and stayed in hotels where the program participants also resided. Through close contact with program participants in these accommodation venues, the researcher was able to discuss issues with them in quite an informal manner. The researcher participated in the two hospital-level programs, examined documents pertinent to MCNE and had informal discussions with the directors of nursing who took charge of MCNE. Six program providers and five program participants from these selected programs were formally interviewed, using a semi-structured interview guide. Interviews were audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim. The research activities are summarized in table 4. Data analysis and interpretation were carried out through three steps informed by the theoretical framework built into this study: Step 1: identifying factors that contradict equal working force development and health equity as described by participants; Step 2: critiquing rules and resource distribution that either enable or inhibit equal nursing workforce development and health equity by the means of MCNE, based on Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 213 Continuing nursing education in China dialogs with participants and by applying Structuration Theory to guide the dialogs; Step 3: critiquing the power and ideology that legitimate rules and resource distribution that fail to address equity in MCNE and health equity; then exploring changes in MCNE that address equal nursing workforce development and health equity, by applying Communicative Action Theory. Thematic analysis was applied to the interview data and open-ended questions from the Delphi study. Descriptive statistics were applied to summarize the quantitative data from round 1 of Delphi study using PASW statistics 17 (IBM, Chicago, IL, USA). Findings from the three-step analysis were synthesized and presented as themes in a coherent manner. Rigor Critical research is viewed as rigorous when the research can generate catalytic validity for changes (Lather 1991). Catalytic validity is defined as ‘the degree to which the research process re-orients, focuses and energizes participants towards knowing reality in order to transform it’ (Lather 1991, 68). Rigor in this study was demonstrated through egalitarian dialogs with key stakeholders about issues of concern and rational consensus on how to improve MCNE. It was anticipated that they might either advocate policy changes or make some positive changes in MCNE in the future. In addition, on the completion of this study, the researcher was invited to present major findings from this study at a national conference focusing on nursing education. As the majority of participants in the conference were nurse leaders, the researcher hoped that the presentation might facilitate further discussions about the improvement of MCNE policy in the future. 
Table 6 Issues of concern in MCNE from the first round of Delphi study (n = 22) Strongly agree (%) Agree (%) Undecided (%) Disagree (%) Strongly disagree (%) To what extent the current MCNE is able to support nurses’ abilities as listed in the table 1. Direct their lifelong learning 50 41 9 2. Seek learning resource 64 27 9 3. Integrate learning with nursing practice 68 27 5 4. Deal with legal and ethical issues 46 50 5 5. Think critically 32 64 5 6. Develop leadership in workplace 27 55 18 7. Problem solving skills 55 32 14 8. Advocate on behalf of clients 32 55 14 9. Understand cultural differences and apply to practice 50 36 14 10. Understand clients’ experience in coping with health issues and diseases 50 45 5 11. Communication skills with clients, their family and other health professionals 59 32 9 Please list issues you are concerned about 1. Healthcare organizations have difficulty in supporting nurses to attend fee-paid programs due to lack of budget for MCNE 2. Accessing CNE programs for nurses is unequal due to limited funding and difficulty in getting study leave 3. Nurses work in small cities or rural areas have geographic difficulties in attending CNE due to lack of program supply at the local level 4. MCNE deteriorates shortage of RNs as nurses demand study leave for CNE programs 5. For many nurses, participating in programs is motivated by meeting credit requirement, rather than improving practice 6. CNE programs are not always beneficial for the improvement of patient care due to lack of connection between learning and practice 7. There is a lack of standards for accreditation and evaluation of CNE providers, CNE programs and learning materials 8. Providing programs for marketing profit exists 9. Re-licensure policy are not always followed as RNs with unqualified credit are still able to obtain re-registration 10. A lack of research on developing competence standards impedes the exploration of relevant programs for nurses regarding their level of practice and specialties FINDINGS Generally, participants in the Delphi study gave relatively low scores to the MCNE relating to the development of crucial abilities in patient care, and showing some concern relating to issues arising from the first round of Delphi study. These were clarified in the six venues of programs (see table 4). Findings are a synthesis of the three-step analysis and are presented as four themes: (1) inaccessibility of learning programs for nurses, (2) undervaluation of workplace-based learning, (3) inequality of the allocation of resources, and 214 Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd LD Xiao (4) demands for additional support in MCNE from nontertiary hospitals. Inaccessibility of learning programs for nurses Although the MCNE policy set detailed credit requirements for re-licensure, these requirements were modified due to the failure, by most nurses, to achieve them. Even RNs employed by richly resourced tertiary hospitals are unable to meet the required Type 1 credits, as a nursing administrator explained: Most nurses in my hospital cannot gain study leave and financial support to attend Type 1 programs. We never 
Table 7 Top three barriers in MCNE and suggestions from the second round of Delphi study Top three barriers Suggestions for policy improvement 
1. Unrealistic credit requirements 2. Discrimination against workplace-based learning 3. Unequal allocation of resources 1. Establishing taskforce for policy review 2. Establishing an advisory group by including representatives from different levels of health-care 3. Organizations and different regions 4. Establishing nursing education unit in tertiary healthcare organization and full-time a nurse educator’ s post to conduct MCNE 5. Establishing consortium of CNE at district level for sharing teaching and learning resources 6. Ensuring every nurse has right to gain basic support to participate 
in CNE by policy initiatives 7. Creating funding to support RNs from rural and remote areas to participate in CNE programs 
audit the type of credit, but accept the total of 25 credits from any type of program for re-licensure. (Fieldwork [F]2, Participant [P]2) I spoke with program participants on an informal basis, confirming that only the total of the 25 credits, and not a proportion of either Type 1 or Type 2 credits, could be used for re-licensure, promotion and renewal of contracts. Participants in the Delphi study (see Table 4) were also concerned about the non-compliance with MCNE policy. Such amendments are evidence of pragmatic resistance by stakeholders to the unachievable credit requirements. However, there has been neither investigation of the actual conditions for re-licensure, nor reflection on this amendment during the entire 10 years of MCNE. A disconnection between policy formulation, implementation and evaluation was evident, and continues to contribute to unresolved problems in MCNE. Even in a capital city, the supply of programs is insufficient, so RNs have little choice but to attend the programs available for them, as explained by a nursing administrator: The Nursing Association in the city allows nurses to buy a card to attend programs to gain credits. Another option is to enrol in online programs. According to their [nurses’] attendance record, it is not unusual that they attended similar programs twice a year for meeting credit requirements, or programs which are not relevant to their practice. (F5, P1) This case indicates the learning coercion that threatens the entire ‘competency’ purpose of MCNE. Such situations were even worse in non-tertiary hospitals, as revealed in an interview with a nursing administrator from a secondary hospital: Meeting credit requirements is one of the necessary conditions to pass the annual appraisal for promotion and renewal of contract ... We have received complaints that some nurses have enrolled in a program without actually attending the program ... It would be unfair if we punish them as we do not give them study leave, nor do we provide any program. (F6, P3) Owing to social sanctions, ordinary RNs had little ability to change the way they learnt. Their passive behavior in giving silent, pragmatic consent to unachievable credit requirements by buying credit or by repetition of programs simply for the credit best represents their coping strategies in their professional lives. Confronting such a situation does not require further coercion to be imposed on these ‘autonomous nurses’, but rather they should be relieved from it by viewing them as ‘masters of their own learning’. These examples clearly reveal that rules in terms of Type 1 and Type 2 credit requirements are unachievable due to the lack of support by other stakeholders (healthcare organizations in this case) and through inadequate resources. Developing such an unachievable policy and failing to amend the rules through evaluation in more than a decade are evidence of the government’s ideology-based policy decision-making mediated by administrative power, with so little action taken to validate such an ideology. Undervaluation of workplace-based learning Participants clearly described the value of workplace-based learning, in linking learning with practice, and felt frustrated by their ‘unrecognized’ learning in secondary hospitals: I gained my expertise in diabetic nursing care through ward-based learning. It is the best way to gain knowledge when the learning group has similar learning needs. We can always apply what we learn to patient care and make 
Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 215 Continuing nursing education in China Inequality changes to improve quality of care ... Unfortunately, these activities do not gain any credits because secondary of the allocation of resources hospitals have no jurisdiction for providing programs. (F6, P3) By promoting capital-city-centered programs, MCNE policy reinforces the existing unequal distribution of resources for This case clearly reveals RNs’ genuine interest in participatworkforce development in healthcare between rural and ing in workplace-based learning, which is clearly also a more urban areas. This was identified in the Delphi study (see economic and efficient way to develop their knowledge and table 4) and also in the interviews, as stated by two nurse competencies. Nursing administrators from non-tertiary hosadministrators from different levels of hospitals: pitals, whom I interviewed and talked with informally, strongly suggested that this particular learning arena was the Our hospital is accredited as a national continuing education provider and we have programs year round. They [the most suitable one in which to acquire specialist knowledge nurses] can meet the credit requirements without attending in a peer-supported environment. In this arena, RNs were outside programs. (F3, P1) more motivated to learn, immersed as they were in the proOur hospital is a secondary hospital in a rural area. On-site fessional culture, while still able to reflect instinctively on their practice. Participants agreed that these learning activiprograms provided by nursing administrators to nurses depend on whether the hospital sends the nurse administrators to attend outside programs. They are required to reties were utilized as a major means to support professional present the programs for all nurses who are unable to growth for most nurses and should therefore be acknowlattend programs. (F4, P2) edged by the MCNE policy. This learning approach is endorsed by healthcare organizations, as stated in another interview with a nursing administrator from a secondary hospital: Observation in two of the on-site programs in fieldworks 4 and 5 (see table 3) confirmed that these programs were attended by two nursing administrators in provincial-level programs and were then re-presented in their hospitals. In order to survive marketing competition, two hospitals Indeed, a general strategy of exempting RNs from rural and merged. There are significant job changes for nurses. Experemote areas from MCNE has been used, which may either rienced nurses seemed to become novices. The hospital recognised the need for ward-based learning and acknowledged it as part of MCNE by taking a risk against the credit generate or increase health inequity, as implied by this nursing administrator from a rural hospital: policy. (F7, P3) We work in isolation compared to nurses in urban areas and All participants in the Delphi study (see table 5) and those in the interviews agreed that workplace-based learning was we do need extra support to update our knowledge and skill in order to keep the local medical services going ... Our patients are peasants with lower incomes and cannot afford used as a strategy to support organizational change during medical treatment in urban hospitals. They depend on our the restructuring of organizations in the recent healthcare local medical services. (F6, P2) reform. As the purpose of these programs was to re-educate nurses to be competent in a new healthcare environment, both organizations and individual nurses stand to benefit from this learning approach. Participants from non-tertiary hospitals strongly suggested that this type of learning should be officially acknowledged by the MCNE policy. These examples clearly show that the rule, in terms of giving only tertiary hospitals the jurisdiction to provide Type 2 programs, suppressed any development interests that non-tertiary healthcare organizations may have had, and their nurses’ genuine interests in undertaking competency Historically, there is a huge gap in health services between rural and urban areas in China due to long-term lower investment in health-care in rural areas, and also owing to little or no medical cover or welfare for peasants. Delivering additional resources in MCNE in these areas is one way to develop more equitable health-care. Unequal learning opportunities were identified as the consequence of lack of strategies to ensure that every RN has access to basic resources in MCNE, and the use of a marketing economic model in health service, as stated in two interviews: development in the workplace. It appeared that the nonWards with better contributions to the hospital’s revenue tertiary hospitals would have had the resources to conduct their own workplace-based learning activities. Again, by can gain more funding to support doctors and nurses to attend outside programs. (F5, P3) setting the rules in MCNE without justifying them by carefully analyzing other stakeholders’ interests, is once again Nursing administrators have a privilege in accessing fee-paid programs because they are viewed as contributing more to the hospital revenue than ordinary nurses. (F7, P2) evidence of using administrative power in policy development, rather than understanding of needs of the various Observation of enrollment records in two national programs stakeholders. and one provincial program confirmed that indeed all 216 Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd LD Xiao organizations participants were nursing administrators. This phenomenon maybe an economical way to support both of nursing administrators, in particular those employed by non-tertiary hospitals and rural areas to implement MCNE. tertiary hospitals, being privileged to attend programs Such a model was also suggested for developing online prothrough means of their organizations’ support allows only a grams, as two of the participants explained: small proportion of RNs to attend programs, thereby making it even less achievable to reduce health inequity. I [an online program writer] wrote these programs based on my understanding of nurses’ learning needs in my hospiThe rule that only a few tertiary hospitals mainly in captal ... I don’t have any opportunity to contact participants ital cities are accredited to provide Type 1 programs is associexcept by submitting written programs to the web-based ated with the ideology of an elite-dominated education, CNE Centre by e-mail. (F2, P1) which highly contradicts the principle of equal access to continuing education. In addition, if we are to close the Although online programs provide flexible learning, they are only available in a few specialties and are mainly suitable for nurses working in tertiary hospitals. Perhaps representanursing workforce discrepancy between urban and rural tives from non-tertiary hospitals should be included in areas, allocating the already limited resources to those who online program development. (F7, P2) have already been well-educated, further marginalizes those who most need CNE. These examples clearly reveal that the MCNE policy has not yet established rules and resources that can enable the Demands for additional support in MCNE from the rural area and non-tertiary hospitals MCNE to support workforce development in rural areas and non-tertiary hospitals. Based on my experience in dialoguing with participants in this study, it was not difficult to know exactly what the healthcare organizations and nurses in the Based on collaborative critical reflection on these uninrural and non-tertiary hospitals expected from MCNE. In tended consequences in MCNE, and through egalitarian diaother words, if conditions for conducting egalitarian discuslogs with participants in interviews and from the second sions with multiple stakeholders are met, or if the only force round of the Delphi study, suggestions for change were to facilitate the agreement of MCNE policy is the force of obtained for improving equity in MCNE (see Table 5). better argument without coercion, a health equity-oriented A nursing administrator in a secondary hospital in a rural MCNE policy may possibly be developed. area suggested the following changes: Although doctors and nurses in our region are exempted DISCUSSION from MCE, the hospital employs two retired medical doctors from [XX] University to support continuing medical Health inequality exists in any healthcare system whether education in order to develop medical services and keep local people with us. Nurses attend these programs. (F6, P2) in developed or developing countries and governments over the world face numerous challenges if they are to address the issues of health equity (CSDH 2008). HowThis case demonstrates that rural areas do need additional ever, developing countries face even greater difficulties if support in MCNE, rather than exempting CNE, as set in the they are to close the gap of health equity, due mainly to policy. Consulting the nurses from rural hospitals in all stages their less well-developed healthcare systems and their of policy development is one way of promoting equitable fewer resources. Therefore, developing countries particuworkforce development through an educational approach. larly need to make ethical decisions for resource allocaSuggestions on how to build sustainable structures and tion through policy formulation in terms of whether develop resources to promote quality in MCNE to set out they tackle poverty-related poor health, or whether they achievable learning requirements for all RNs, including choose to make richly resourced hospitals even richer. those working in rural areas was a major part of our discusFindings from this study reveal that such a decision is only sion. The suggestions included the following: likely to be achieved through egalitarian discussions that My experience in both public and private hospitals told me represent⁄include the disadvantaged groups in a country. that tertiary hospitals should have an education unit and Establishing a reference group that includes RNs from fulltime educators in order to address the quality of education. Each district should have a CNE centre to be able to share resources and programs between tertiary and non-terrural areas and non-tertiary healthcare organizations generates at least a structural validity for MCNE policy tiary hospitals. (F2, P2) development. Findings from this study suggest that ComBasing practice of MCNE on a local governance model that includes representatives from various levels of healthcare municative Action (Habermas 1979) in the presence of multiple stakeholders can indeed be used as a normative Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 217 Continuing nursing education in China (American approach to minimize ideology domination in public polNurses Association 2000). Both the various memicy development. bers’ engagement in consultation and debate in the formulaDeveloping nursing ideology can help nursing profestion of policy, and its implementation and evaluation played sionals to argue their ideas and practices in developing a a key role in the further development of CNE policies in competent nursing workforce and to debate hegemonic these countries. ideologies. Given the dyadic nature of ideology, nursing ideIn China, as in other developing countries, the majority ology should be updated regularly, from a base of commuof the 254 million people who live in extreme poverty live nicative action-grounded ideological critique. Suggestions in rural areas (World Bank 2009). Tackling poverty-related from participants in this area include developing standards diseases and health issues cannot be successful without and the scope to govern the teaching and learning, and selfbuilding a competent nursing workforce in these rural regulation in MCPD. Traditionally, nurses have not been areas. The ratio of RNs to the population is 1.03:1000 in prepared to fully engage in the process of policy decisionChina (CMOH 2003), which is among the lower ranks making and debate (International Council of Nurses 2005), of developing countries and indicates a vast shortage of particularly in developing countries where decisions are nurses (Buchan and Calman 2004). The ratio of RNs to made predominately by the very few in a highly centralized the population in rural areas is 0.55:1000 and much lower administrative system. As nurses play a key role in primary than that in urban areas (CMOH 2003). It is most unlikely care, they should be competent enough to advocate health that healthcare organizations in these areas will release equity on behalf of their clients. One way to act on promotRNs to attend capital-city-centered programs. Findings from ing health equity is to influence and shape the public health this study suggest that nurses from rural areas are most in policy. Findings from this study suggest that the ability to need of CNE. Therefore, the goal set in ‘the 11th plan for critique ideology, develop nursing ideology and initiate the next 5 years CME’ (CMOH 2006) should be rewritten structural changes is one of the key attribute of leadership, to ensure participation of 100% of RNs in rural and given the dyadic nature of ideology, and the power of social remote areas, rather than 60% of them, so that they have structures on people’s action (as shown in figure 1). Howan opportunity to gain CNE appropriate to their learning ever, these leadership attributes have not yet been discussed, needs. nor built into the nursing curriculum in China. Future studies should focus on this area. CONCLUSION It is extensively reported that policy implementation deficits are a common challenge for policy-makers due to By utilizing a critical framework to guide critical ethnograthe complexities of the issues (Hill 2005). One-off decisions phy for MCNE policy evaluation, together with a two-round on public health policy formulation cannot deal with the Delphi study, this study identified that the current MCNE complexities involved. Incremental policy development policy is merely maintaining existing nursing workforce eduthrough interactions between policy-makers and stakeholdcational discrepancies, and therefore potentially maintaining ers is strongly recommended (Baum 2008). Policy evaluation the health inequity in China. Inappropriate credit requireis one way to study policy implementation and to support ments and resource allocation in MCNE have been identiincremental policy decision-making (Hill 2005). Findings in fied and analyzed. The power relations and ideology that this study strongly suggest a formal review of the current legitimate these requirements and resource allocations have MCNE policy and incremental policy development in condibeen critiqued. Findings from this study strongly suggest that tions that generate agreement among multiple stakeholders one way to improve public health policy is to integrate and being based on a rational consensus. principles of health equity by engaging in policy and dialog Controversies in terms of learning for meeting required with key stakeholders. This study, however, was limited due study hours, and for continuing competence have been to the use of context-dependent qualitative data, and so the discussed in the literature in the early stage of MCNE in results cannot be generalized, but may, however, be applied both the USA and the UK (Carpenito 1991; Lazarus, Permalto similar situations. off, and Dickson 2002). Flexible learning styles and focusing This study was enhanced by the integration of two criton competence development had been addressed in the ical social theories that demonstrated methodological further development of MCNE policy. Self-directed learning, advantages to analyze and critique the dialectical relationpeer review of practice, workplace-based learning and develships between social structures, power relations and ideoloping a personal learning portfolio have all been endorsed ogy, and people’s action. Such methodology is particularly by professional bodies to encourage participation in CNE important for a developing country where structures and 218 Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd LD Xiao tzfg_info.asp?dq_id=0 resources to support public policy development through (in Chinese) (accessed 2 August democratic processes are still imperfect. Although the criti2002). cal ethnographer wishes to catalyze changes through a critiCMOH. 2003. Report of 1997 to 2001 healthcare developcal research project, changes may not happen at all due to ment in China. From Chinese Ministry of Health website: the complex nature of practice change in policy develophttp://www.moh.gov.cn/publicfiles/business/htmfiles/ ment, and its implementation in a society where ideology zwgkzt/pgb/200805/34846.htm (in Chinese) (accessed and power are so imbalanced. In addition, changes largely 10 May 2003). depend on a degree of action being taken to influence polCMOH. 2005. A Blueprint for nursing development between icy development by those who are the most affected by the 2005 to 2010. From Chinese Ministry of Health current MCNE policy. website: http://www.moh.gov.cn/publicfiles/business/ htmfiles/mohyzs/s3593/200804/18620.htm (in ChiACKNOWLEDGEMENT nese) (accessed 9 November 2005). CMOH. 2006. The 11th plan for the next 5 years in continThe author acknowledges that the research was funded by uing medical education. http://www.moh.gov.cn/ an Australian International Postgraduate Research Scholarpublicfiles/business/htmfiles/wsb/pzcjd/200804/20699. ship. The author is extremely appreciative of Dr Judith htm (in Chinese) (accessed 12 November 2007). Clare, Ms Judith Condon, Dr Janice Orrell and Dr Trudy CMOH. 2008a. Advice on the improvement of compensaRudge for their excellent supervision, encouragement tion for National Rural Cooperative Medical Scheme. and support during the process of this study. The fieldhttp://61.49.18.65/publicfiles/business/htmlfiles/ work in China was supported by Ms Sheila Iu, president mohncwsgls/s6476/200812/38557.htm (in Chinese) of the Hong Kong Nursing Education and Training Foun(accessed 9 November 2008). dation. CMOH. 2008b. Nurses Administration Ordinance in P.R. China. http://www.moh.gov.cn/publicfiles/business/ REFERENCES htmfiles/mohbgt/pw10806/200805/35187.htm (in Chinese) (accessed 21 August 2009). American Nurses Association. 2000. Scope and standards of CMOH. 2009. Report on 2008 healthcare development practice for nursing professional development. Washington, in China. http://www.moh.gov.cn/publicfiles/business/ DC: American Nurses Association. htmlfiles/mohwsbwstjxxzx/s8208/200904/40250.htm Baum F. 2008. The new public health. South Melbourne, Vic.: (in Chinese) (accessed 30 May 2009). Oxford University Press. CSDH. 2008. Closing the gap in a generation: Health equity Bloom G and X Gu. 1997. Health sector reform: Lessons through action on the social determinants of health. Geneva: from China. Social Science & Medicine 45: 351–60. World Health Organization. Buchan J and L Calman. 2004. The global shortage of registered Edwards N, DH Zhou and LX Song. 2001. Continuing edunurses: An overview of issues and actions. Geneva: Intercation for nurses in Tianjin Municipality, the People’s national Council of Nurses. Republic of China. Journal of Continuing Education in Carpenito L. 1991. Mandatory updating: Why coercion does Nursing 32: 31–7. not work. Nursing Times 87: 29–31. Gao Q. 2006. Health care: the current situation and Carspecken PF. 1996. Critical ethnography in educational 11th 5-year plan. The Journal of Qoushi 422: 15–7. (in research. New York: Routledge. Chinese) Chen F and WZ Wu. 2005. Problems in continuing nursing Giddens A. 1984. The constitution of society: Outline of the theory education in primary and secondary healthcare organizaof structuration. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press. tions with recommended strategies. Today Nurse 2: 85–6. Habermas J. 1972. Knowledge and human interests. London: (in Chinese) Heinemann Educational Books Ltd. Chen H, A Xu and H Wang. 2003. An investigation of the Habermas J. 1979. Communication and the evolution of society. status quo of continuing nursing education in 17 hospiLondon: Heinemann. tals and reflection on findings. Chinese Journal of Nursing Held D. 1980. Introduction to critical theory. Berkeley: Univer38: 577–9. (in Chinese) sity of California Press. CMOH. 2000. Regulation of continuing medical educaHill M. 2005. The public policy process. Harlow, UK: Pearson tion (trial). http://3wapp.haoyisheng.com/pubinfo_ Longman. Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 219 Continuing nursing education in China Nursing International Council of Nurses. 2005. Guidelines on and Midwifery Council. 2002. Supporting nurses shaping effective health policy. http://www.icn.ch/ and midwives through lifelong learning. http://www. Guideslines_shaping.pdf (accessed 16 June 2009). nmc-uk.org (accessed 7 January 2003). Lather P. 1991. Getting smart. New York: Routledge. Wagstaff A, M Lindelow, S Wang and S Zhang. 2009.Reforming Lazarus JB, A Permaloff and CD Dickson. 2002. Evaluation China’s rural health system. Washington DC: World Bank. of Alabama’s mandatory continuing education programs Whittaker S, W Carson and MC Smolenski. 2000. Assuring for reasonableness, access, and value. Journal of Contincontinued competence – Policy questions and approauing Education in Nursing 33: 102–11. ches: How should the profession respond? http:// Li JL, XD Chen, YM Fu and QY Wang. 2006. Investigation nursingworld.org/ojin/topic10/tpc10-4.htm (accessed 16 on the needs and states of continuing nursing education December 2002). in primary and secondary healthcare organizations. WHO. 2007. Commission on social determinants of health. GenAnhui Medical and Pharmaceutical Journal 10: 382–3. (in eva: World Health Organization. Chinese) World Bank. 2005. Health service delivery in China: A review. Liu Y, WC Hsiao and K Eggleston. 1999. Equity in health Washington, DC.: World Bank. and health care: The Chinese experience. Social Science World Bank. 2009. From poor areas to poor people: China’s evolv& Medicine 49: 1349–56. ing poverty reduction agenda: An assessment of poverty and Morrow RA and DD Brown. 1994. Critical theory and methodolinequality in China. The World Bank Office, Beijing: ogy. London: Sage Publications. World Bank. 220 Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd LD Xiao