See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/318381267 
Temporal and Political Analysis of Financial Transformation in Higher Education in Turkey 
Article · January 2016 
CITATIONS 
READS 0 
65 
1 author: 
Ali İlker Kurt Ankara University 
2 PUBLICATIONS 0 CITATIONS 
SEE PROFILE 
All content following this page was uploaded by Ali İlker Kurt on 12 July 2017. 
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. 
Kurt, A. I. (2016). Temporal and Political Analysis of Financial Transformation in Higher Education in Turkey. International Journal of Educational Policies, 10(1), pp. 21-82. 
ISSN: 1307-3842 
Temporal and Political Analysis of Financial Transformation in Higher Education in Turkey* 
Dr. Ali Ilker Kurt** Ministry of National Education Turkey 
Abstract 
In this study, the effects of neo liberal policies that are applied after the 1980’s and negatively affected presentation of public services on change/transformation of higher education system in Turkey are examined. Within the scope of change/transformation in finance of universities from past to present due to the university concept imposed by fast growing capitalism in global, dynamics of change/transformation in universities of Turkey, historical background of finance of higher education, developments realized within the framework of finance are tried to be defined deriving from the thoughts temporal/chronological changes of public spending on higher education and thoughts of administrators of universities on change/transformation in finance of universities. In order to determine the financial changes in universities in Turkey post 1980, public spending on higher education between 1938-2012 was pointed out as well as increase ratios in public spending between 1981-2012 were compared. Besides, in order to define neo liberal policies effects on universities creating their own incomes in Turkey, total incomes of universities during 1947-2012 were revealed. The process of universities’ creating their own incomes was conceptualized as “Self Income”. Within this context, by pointing out temporal development of self income that takes growing ratio in total income, the levels of universities in terms of creating their own income was tried to be presented. 
Key Words: Finance of higher education, public education spending, capital and transfer spending, self-income. 
* Data used in this study were taken from PhD thesis titled “Temporal and Political Analysis of Financial Transformation in Higher Education in Turkey” by Ali İlker Kurt under the advising of Prof. Hasan H. Aksoy, in Ankara University Institute of Educational Sciences. 
** Ali Ilker Kurt has PhD. from Ankara University Institute of Educational Sciences Department of Educational Administration and Policy. He is a teacher affiliated with Ministry of Education, Turkey. E-mail: aliilkerkurt@hotmail.com 
Analysis of Financial Transformation in Higher Education Introduction 
Heraclitus, living from 535-574 B.C, had brought a very distinctive approach for the source of knowledge and had focused on “action” as the source of knowledge. He had drawn attention to the “essence” with his well-known sayings implying the continuous change of life such as “no man ever steps in the same river twice”. When this matter is taken into consideration with regards to higher education, the direction of change/transformation, how the quality and right to public education is affected, state’s approach to the higher education and how this approach affect the spending policy, how this change/transformation affect/may affect the large sections of the community are crucially important to reach the ideal of democratic society. Today, it is seen that university’s dimension of creating qualified manpower is relatively more important than its other aims. Giroux (2009) argues that the universities, in capitalist formation, are seen as places where professional competency is gained and thus they have turned into vocational schools. By stating that this situation narrows the prospect of the universities and precludes the scientific development, Giroux implies that a dire tableau is emerged where the university, day by day, is becoming indifferent to the ideal of empowering the democratic communal living potential, and it is being forgotten that the academy has a significant role to improve the communal support and casework. Giroux, stressing that the higher education must be the communal centre of criticism, puts forward the idea that the university, with its present situation, has lost its function of being the communal centre of criticism (Giroux, 2009: 34). Giroux (2009), conceptualizing today’s university as “Neoliberal University”, stresses that critical intellectuals should uphold the public space which is being removed day by day against the neoliberal university model. 
Giroux, stating that the education given at universities is only a dimension of the whole work (2008: 38), argues that the university, at the same time, is a vital, institutional, and political platform to allow the democratic subjects form themselves, to experience democratic relation patterns, and to criticize the government by revealing its anti-democratic and oppressive manner. On the other hand, John and Parsons (2004: 8) attribute the reasons of the failure of theoretical assessment of public education at higher education to some conditions of universities and emphasize that the political stance of today’s university and its quality to react against the outer world is a mythos. He implies that one of the reasons of this situation is the political process choosing administers at the universities. As a result of this process, administers at the universities in the 20th century are bound to meet the political demands and try to influence government’s decision about the universities they work for Wright, Cory-Scruggs and King (2009: 59) state that the uncertainty at financing the state universities will gradually grow in the first decade of the 21st century and the universities, so as to overcome the uncertainty at funding, will have to tend towards the domestic and external sources to continue funding their activities, and apply to alternative ways in order to create administrative and financial sources such as increasing the tuition fees, organizing income-generating activities at administrative and faculty level, cutting the spending for the staff, using different applications at deciding the tuition fees. 
Recently, the preparation of the new higher education law in Turkey has been in progress. The proposed law draft implies to reform the administrative structure of the universities in Turkey in accordance with new liberal policies, and activating a marketing understating at the universities is being tried with financial arrangements. Aksoy (2012) describes the proposed law as capital’s repealing the university and states as: 
Nothing is taken into consideration to limit the capital in the new law draft. It includes the Constitution, other laws, the university understanding of academicians and society, the struggle the humanity has been giving for ages to deprivatize and democratize the knowledge, the efforts driven by the ethic and communal responsibility feeling of the academic community. Even in the first articles of high order teaching - which is contradictory with the Constitution and basic university concepts but is brought without being escaped from the idea that reading and spending time for a text, which is evidently suits to the spirit of neoliberal time, is useless – it is expected that it will be applied by the representatives of government and capital to serve the market power such as competition and quality. 
It is significant to determine the finance policies, financial notions and tools and their suitability for this purpose or how efficient they can be so as to reach the aims such as to create university as a criticism center which is a necessity for the university, to make it one of the subjects at the administration of the country and to reinforce its position as such. It is vital to detect the cases that financially hinders the universities directly or indirectly from functioning as institutions that enrich the democracy. 
The Higher Education Law draft tends towards totally transforming and “evaporating” the principles such as scientific freedom, academic-financial- administrative autonomy which are hoped to survive at universities (Aksoy, 2012). Balaban and Karahanoğulları (2013) who took the financial aspects of the draft have stated that the new Higher Education Law might bring new regulations for the student fees via university councils and the student fees may be reconsidered, and the provisions related with resource diversity may cause new problems. The Outcomes of New Liberal Policies in Higher Education 
In literature, there are many studies which have been done in almost every country by many different writers and have implied that there has been a remarkable change in the finance of the higher education (Tilak, 2002; John, Parsons, 2004; Jhonstone and Marcucci, 2010; Heller, 2006, Asonuma, 2002). As Ünal (1985) also stated that the regulations upon the finance is the focus of this change. Unesco (2009: 67), Jhonstone & Marcucci (2010) argued that two phenomena in the finance of the higher education are dominant in the first decade of the 21st century. First, they stressed that the higher education, in social context, has been increasingly becoming important in respect to economy, individualization and democracy, and social justice. Second, the cost of the higher education has been significantly increasing. It was expressed that popularization, demographic causes, the rising number of high school graduates, the will to have a university education, educational and research activities have increased the cost of education (Jhonstone, Marcucci, 2010). Despite the increase in the cost of education, it has been observed that the public spending has universally been on decline. 
Heller (2006) stated that the total student number in the US increased from 9.4 million to 12.3 million from 1980’s to 2003. Although the state has continued to financially support the higher education, it has been indifferent to the increasing number of students. The cost of education has been a burden on the students and their families. 
The commodification of education necessitated production for the exchange value of itself. Any transformation in the aim of production leads a change for all equipment providing this production. After a decrease in public support for it, education which is motivated by the feelings of profit and charity returns the school to a market place, and a race of charity (Council, 2012: 338). It may be said that the negative impacts of new liberal politics in higher education can be analysed in two main areas. First, the impact of the reduction of the sources; second, the impact of commercialisation of higher education. Jhonstone and Marcucci (2010: 31) discuss the impact of the reduction of the sources in the higher education under a few headings. 
First of these is the impacts on the universities and other institutions. These are the matters such as crowded classrooms and conference halls, heavy course load on the faculty members, insufficient libraries, computers and communication devices which are not updated, disrupted physical atmosphere, giving less time and support for the research, deterioration of quality at teaching and learning, and waste of grants. 
The second one is the impacts on national higher education system. They are the capacity limitation, insufficient regulations, closing up some invaluable faculties due to financial problems, and weak participation to the global economy of knowledge. 
Third of this can be listed as students’ facing with tuition fees directly, rising costs of studentship, the need for working to meet these needs or debt spiral as a result of these needs. Students may meet the cost of their education if they are lucky. 
Students face with leaving their education because of university expenditure. Even in developed countries such as Canada, Sweden, England, and the US, it is seen that some students leave their education due to the education cost (Jhonstone, Marcucci, 2010). Olssen and Peters (2005: 325) explain the impacts of new liberalism in higher education as follows: 
24 
1. Enforcing the job performance measure brought by company structure which is established on hierarchic model instead of horizontal structure of collagen and democratic administration. 2. Some of the impacts of this problem are market’s and government’s attempts of restructuring themselves and the need to meet the new demands created by this attempts, heavy workload which is a result of rising need for expertness, the problems brought about because of the imposition of the government. The professional autonomy based on traditional understanding has been eroded as a result of heavy work load in research areas and with the hierarchic structure brought by new liberal structure. New liberalism systematically restructure this area by using the gaps in the concepts of professional autonomy. 3. Market pressure increasingly outrages upon rights of traditional understanding and reshape it to adjust the market conditions. For instance, a need for an external research aid for some departments and academic units and opening summer school are being discussed. 
When the expenditures of the universities in France and England are analysed, it is seen that their expenditures are increasingly rising. Carpentier (2009: 235) states that the expenditure in 1929 Great Depression and Second World War showed a decline and the spending for university has dramatically affected by the changes in the economic structure. 
Figure 1. University spending in England and France from 1921 to 2003. Source: Carpentier 2009: 234. 
Carpentier (2009: 235) states that there are increases in university spending by years, yet spending per student shows rises and falls by periods. The governments in the UK since the mid 1980’s have adopted neo-liberal policy at least on discourse level. They defended the idea that the educational institutions should be bound to the market discipline (Turner, 2008: 97). The aims of emerging the market mechanism were to minimum the cost of education to the state budget, to make best use of sources by using less/fewer sources, and to increase the performance (Bernal, 2013: 56). It is seen that the tuition fees has risen and private financing has been increasingly preferred in higher education and spending of public sources has been decreased in England from 1970’s onward with regulation done for the higher education. 
Figure 2 shows the impacts of new liberalism in higher education in England, as it did in many other countries as well. 
Figure 2. Spending per student in England and France from 1921 to 2003. Source: Carpentier 2009: 235. 
When the revenues of the universities in England in 1970’s and onwards are analysed, it can be said that there has been a steady increase but the increase in public spending for education has lost its momentum. When the revenue structure of universities is analysed, it is seen that the revenue coming from private sources is taken from student fees and other private sources. Figure 3 shows the percentage of the university revenues. 
Figure 3. The sources of revenues in the universities in England. Source: Carpentier 2009: 238. 
Figure 3 clearly shows that the public revenues decreased in England after 1970’s and this decrease was attempted to be substituted with private revenues and tuition fees, however it failed. 
The Outcomes of Commercialization in Higher Education 
The outcomes of commercialization in higher education are analysed in literature under headings as such:rosion at Academic Standards: Universities that aim to show great performance should consider well the appointment of professors and appropriateness of the procedures. The decision making body should not only bear in mind the quality of education, research and other contributions to the academic targets of the institution. A professor should not be hired only because he may find resources from companies or he leads a profitable project. The image that universities hire professors because of financial reasons demoralize the academic staff and causes university to lose its prestige since this may give rise to the idea that the university does not pay attention to the qualified research and teaching (Bok, 2007: 106-107). 
Damages for the Academic Community: Commercialization may create tensions and separation –which do not previously exist - in the academic community by undermining trust and colleague relation in it. The academic staff who have performed great effort for traditional academic positions may feel anger for their colleagues who set up a new business or share most of their time for counselling. Academicians in Humanities may think that they are not paid the importance they deserve. Conflicts between the administration and academicians may occur because of sharing the patent revenues or a company set up by an academician but funded by the university. Postgraduate students may blame their superiors with stealing their ideas and selling them to the companies for their own profit (Bok, 2007: 112). Aksoy (2005: 5) argues that the higher education is seen as a market where international companies more easily use it; the universities are run by exterior intervention without being asked to the university administration because of the reasons such as education is began to be sold in international markets as an export product and technological products are being sold via universities; and because of the change in the higher education system led by the rising revenues of projects. 
Withdrawal or Decrease of Public Resources: This means the commercialization of the thought or pricing it by other financial resources. 
The moment when this happens, the academician is no longer has the freedom of thought and he ought to “think in accordance with the system”. He may even be expected to try finding the ways of thinking - which he is paid for - as he is ought to (Evans, 2007: 4). 
Risks for the Prestige of the University: Commercial activities may risk the prestige of the university in the eyes of the public. Public trust has decreased not only for the state but also for all the institutions including the university in the last forty years in the US universities which are committed to the truth and learning are thought to be traditionally included into this group. Besides, professors are paid less in private sector compared to most of those having a similar level of intelligence and education (Bok, 2007: 114).The Effects of New Liberalism on Turkish Economy and the Higher Education 
The decisions taken on 24th January 1980 and the three-year-standby agreement with IMF signed in June of the same year established the de-facto beginning of the new liberal transformation or adaptation process in Turkey (Sönmez, 2009: 25). Boratav (2004: 148-149) argued that the new liberal model marking the years till 1988 with the program that was outlined on 24th January and was presented to the masses with an intensive ideological campaign of which slogan was “there is no alternative” from the top on down shows all the known features of typical structural adaptation programs which were developed by the World Bank with the stabilization policy that was imposed in 1970’s by IMF to many underdeveloped countries which were under difficult financial conditions. Balseven and Önder (2009: 101) analyzed the effects of the new liberal policies in economics under two terms as 1975-1999 and 2000-2010. Real public expenditures are put under tax expenditures of the capital in the first term and are put under IMF policies section to meet the interest debts in the second term. It is possible to comment on the philosophy of the budget application under IMF section and the effect of the budget on the domestic income as such (Balseven and Önder, 2009:101): budget has been used as way of pressing to balance the inflation at one side and to meet the interest debts. It is understood that the budget seemingly is used to meet the interest debts by minimizing the public services rather than contributing the community development and domestic income. Following the military coup of 12th September 1980, as it was seen in almost every field, the higher education was reorganized by the Higher Education Act No. 2547 in 1981 and this shaped the period till now. Since 1980, universities have also undergone important financial transformations. Downsizing the state, restructuring and privatization, economic crises that were hoped to be solved with foreign credits, deeply effected various public institutions including universities (Kurul, 2006:67). 
Hatipoğlu (2001:342) argued that the university had two important losses due to the new regulations. First of these, education and training became of top priority in the new regulations and the other one is that the universities lost their autonomy, Hatipoğlu expressed. The universities, whose autonomy process began in 1919 and was interrupted in 1933, received administrative and scientific autonomy when Hasan Ali Yücel was on duty as the Minister of National Education in 1946 with 18.06.1946 dated and 4936 numbered Act. While that gain was broadened in 1960 and 1973, it was totally lost in1981 (Hatipoğlu, 2001:342). 
It can be said that the concept of circulating capital which was first used in 1947 in the Act No. 4936 was broadened after 1980 and the universities’ capacity to create financial resources was continuously increased. Changes were done in the Act related with circulating capital in the following years. It is seen that these regulations gave way to the use of the circulating capital revenues in many different areas. At the same time, a legal ground was formed to allow universities to share a 5% of its circulating capital revenues to financially support the scientific researches in the framework of Scientific Research Projects unit. It was stated in the report called “Turkish Higher Education’s Today” prepared by CoHE in 1998 that it was a necessity to radically reform the administrative and financial system in accordance with the modern applications, and it was accepted that the classical budget system consisted of many items was then the most unproductive system. It was stressed in the report that a lump sum budget system that provides bullet allotment was applied in all the universities in developed countries (YÖK, 1998: 59). Since the share of public resources was reduced in their budgets, the universities started to make their own resources and to sell the information they created to the market as a meta rather than disseminating and sharing it. Therefore, the market turned into the power that determines which courses to be given, which programs to be opened and closed, and which researches to be supported at the universities. For instance, the philosophy departments were trying to survive with their 80 students in only four out of thirty foundation universities in the higher education programs in 2007 (Özdem, 2008:117). 
It is seen that radical changes were done in budget items of the budget system with the decisions taken dealing with finance management in Turkey with the Act of Public Finance Management no. 5018 enacted in 2003. Güzelsarı (2008) analyzed this transformation in all its aspects in his book. It is observed that a structure based upon performance was aimed to set up with the Act no. 5018. In accordance with the Act, classifications of the budget were changed and new concepts were begun to be used instead. 
Karakütük (2012: 328) argued that the real reasons of this new budget coding was to allow IMF and The World Bank to monitor and direct Turkey’s monetary methods besides its other stressed aims such as to allow detecting the problems of the program, to provide functional classification, to allow measuring and analysis, to form a basis to a budget based upon performance, and to provide monetary transparency and accountability. 
The aim of this study is to analyze and comment on the financial resource allocation system, its use and finance policies, and the new liberal approaches which have been followed after 1980’s within the scope of equalitarian democratic social ideals conflict. 
Method 
Survey model is applied at this research which aims to present the allotment and use of financial resources in the higher education system in Turkey and the changes in finance policy and the reflections of these changes in the universities. For this purpose, both the analysis of numeric data of the finance of the university and the presentation of the reflections of finance policies to the university are required. Hence, this study requires two-dimensional data collection and analysis processes. One of these is the resource and document search to present the situation of the finance of higher education, and the other one is the interviews done with the university administers to present the impact of finance policies to the university. In the qualitative part of the study, it is aimed to determine the finance policies in higher education within the scope of the observation and experience of the university administers, how the allotment of financial resources and use of this resources is applied, and how this process works. Because it is required to know the application process and its outcomes in order to present the impacts of the finance policies. It may be possible – on the basis of the views of university administers - to present in detail the reflections of the finance policies to the university, different dimensions of these policies, and how the university interpret and react to the problems they face. 
In this study, geometric increase method (compound interest formula) was applied to calculate the higher education spending done by the Ministry of National Education in the years 1939 – 1940 – 1941 – 1943 – 1967 – 1969 – 1973 – 1979 since the final account budget law of aforementioned years were not reachable (Karakütük, 2012:269). The calculations were done by using the year 2005 as a base so as to analyze the change in the spending items correctly, measurably, and comparably. 2005 was chosen since it was comparably a more stable year by means of inflation and general trend in prices. Consumer Price Index of 1938 was converted to the one of 2005. For this conversion, the indexes of all years from 1938 to 2012 were divided to the index of 2005 as Consumer Price Index of 2005 were used as the base year (Karakütük 2012:391). Current expenditures and transfer spending were converted to fixed prices by using CPI (Consumer Price Index) as a base. Investment spending was converted to fixed prices by using WPI (Wholesale Price Index) as a base. WPI is given in Appendix 4. In this part of the study, the findings were gathered mostly with document analysis and calculation. Spending per student was prepared by considering the higher education spending amounts from 1986 to 2012. The number of students did not include bachelor and college students of those attending the Open Education Faculty. Evening education, master, and PhD students were included to the student numbers. 
The Population of the Study and Study Group 
The main purpose of qualitative research at determining the sample is to reach people who may provide comprehensive knowledge related with the purpose of the study. Therefore, the important thing in qualitative research is not to reach as many people as possible but to include those who may have the most comprehensive knowledge or experience. Consequently, it is needed to determine not the probability samplings but a sampling based on the purpose of the study. 
Detailed interviews have been conducted with the participation of Chancellor, Vice Chancellor, Deans and Vice Deans. In this scope, the required permissions have been obtained. Only one of the permissions obtained by the universities has been presented as an example. Permission for voice recording was requested from the participants before the interviews. Only 9 (nine) out of 26 participants rejected this request, and the views of these participants was noted in written. Those whose views were noted in written were shown the notes taken and they were asked if they object to any point in these notes. It was told to the participants before the interview that their identity will be kept confidential. Having completed the interviews, recordings (by considering the sensitivity of the participants) were turned into text by the researcher’s himself. The interviews with 26 participants were 19-hour-long, and the script of these interviews covered 127 pages. 
Table 1. Details of the participants 
Code Gender Position University work for 
A1 Male Dean (Previous) A University A2 Male Vice Chancellor A University A3 Male Dean A University A4 Female Dean B University A5 Female Deputy Dean B University A6 Female Dean (Previous) B University A7 Male Dean B University A8 Female Dean C University A9 Male Vice Dean C University A10 Female Faculty Secretary C University A11 Male Vice Chancellor C University A12 Male Dean C University A13 Male Dean C University A14 Male Dean C University A15 Male Dean D University A16 Male Dean D University A17 Male Vice Dean E University A18 Male Vice Dean E University A19 Male Vice Dean E University A20 Male Dean E University A21 Male Dean E University A22 Male Dean E University A23 Male Dean F University A24 Male Dean F University A25 Male Dean F University A26 Male Chancellor G University 
The nominal spending universities did was used by turning it into fixed price. On the other hand, logarithmic pattern was applied for serial analysis. Within this 
31 
scope, analyses were carried in accordance with Y=a bx equation as one of the data related with Y and X variables has arithmetic sequence characteristic and the other one has geometric sequence characteristic. Here, Y presents semi-log values, and X shows the years - an arithmetic sequence (Karakütük, 2012: 295). 
In this study, geometric increase method (compound interest formula) was applied to calculate the higher education spending done by the Ministry of National Education in the years 1939 – 1940 – 1941 – 1943 – 1967 – 1969 – 1973 – 1979 since the final account budget law of aforementioned years were not reachable (Karakütük, 2012:269). 
In order to reach an accurate, measurable and comparable analysis of the changes in the spending items, the calculations were carried as fixed to the year of 2005. 2005 was chosen as it was a more stable year in Turkey by means of prices and inflation. Content analysis – a qualitative data analysis - and descriptive analysis technics were applied in the analysis of the data obtained from the interview forms. 
Findings and Discussion 
Findings and Discussion of the Historical Change of University Spending in Turkey 
The spendings from 1938 to 2012 were initially evaluated with graphs in order to present the historical course of university spending in Turkey. Two different courses of time were compared so as to compare before and after 1980, these are 1938-1980 and 1981-2012. This method was also applied to compare the increase rates of the revenues of the universities. Additionally, the increase rate of the number of students and spending per student were presented as well. The graph below shows the higher education spending with current and fixed prices (2005=100) in Turkey from 1938 to 2012. Figure 4. The Historical Change of the Public Spending in Turkey for the Universities from 1938 to 2012 
When the graph comparing the higher education spending in England and France in Figure 1 which is presented by Carpenter (2009: 231-245) who was given as a reference in literature and the Figure 4 which shows the higher education spending in Turkey were compared, it can easily be told that the economic fluctuations in Turkey directly affect the higher education spending. While there was a steady increase in university spending from 1960 to 1979, there was a decrease from 1980 to 1985. This period was the time when the new liberal politics were begun to be applied as economic policy in Turkey. This graph especially shows the declines in the spending in the years such as 1994 and 2001 when the economic depressions happened. The spendings of the universities were directly affected by the economic fluctuations of those periods. This situation is similar to Carpenter’s (2009: 231-245) evaluation of England and France. Economic fluctuations have caused declines in the spendings of the universities in England and France. It is seen that the university spending in Turkey increased 8.8 % on yearly average from 1938 to 2012. Figure 5 presents the graph of this increase. 
Figure 5. The Historical Change of the University Spending in Turkey from 1938 to 2012 (2005=100) 
Figure 5 presents the higher education spending in Turkey from 1938 to 2012. The spending from 1938 to 2012 has been divided into two parts so as to compare and analyse the increase rate of higher education spending in Turkey before and after 1980. Accordingly, the increase rate of higher education spending between the periods of 1938-1980 and 1981-2012 were compared. It is recognized that the higher education spending in Turkey has increased 12.3 % on yearly average from 1938 to 1980. Table 6 presents the graph of this increase. 
Y=166.926.085.( 1,123240)43 
Figure 6. The Historical Change of the Public Universities’ Spending (TL) in Turkey from 1938 to 1980. 
33 
It is seen that the higher education spending in Turkey increased 6.2 % on yearly average from 1981 to 2012. Figure 7 presents the graph of this increase. Y=3.278.663.720 (1,062)32 
Figure 7. The Historical Change of the Public Universities Spending in Turkey from 1981 to 2012. 
When the higher education spending in Turkey is compared between the periods of 1938-1980 and 1981-2012, it is seen that the increase rate drops approximately in half in the latter period. While the increase rate of higher education spending was 12.3 % in the years 1938-1980, it decreased to 6.2 % in the period of 1981- 2012. 
When Figure 6 and 7 is compared, it is seen that the graph trend showing the higher education spending in 1938-1980 period is more upright than the graph trend of 1981-2012 period. 
Findings and Comment on the Temporal Change of University Spending in Turkey 
It is substantial to determine especially which types of spending (current, capital, transfer) showed a decline, having decided why the higher education spending’s increase rate was lower in the years 1981-2012 compared to the previous periods. In this context, the increase rate in the current, capital, transfer spending in Turkey after 1980 was calculated. 
It is seen that the current spending in higher education in Turkey increased 5.6% on yearly average from 1986 to 2012. Âdem (1977: 59) identified that the current spending in Turkey increased 11.3% on yearly average between 1960 and 1972. It is recognized that there was a correlation between the temporal change of the total higher education spending between 1938 and 1980, and there was a significant decline especially in current spending. It is seen that the investment spending in higher education in Turkey increased 7.9% on yearly average from 1986 to 2012. From 1986 to 2012, the transfer spending in higher education in Turkey increased 3.2% on yearly average. Figure 8 shows the current, investment, and transfer spending in universities in Turkey from 1986 to 2012. Significant decrease in transfer spending was recognized especially after 2005. 
Investment (capital) spending is recognized as performing relatively the highest increase by 7.9% in the higher education spending in Turkey. Yet, transfer spending was cut so as to provide this increase in investment spending and the increase in transfer spending decreased to 3.2%. Still, 5.6% increase in current spending may be seen as an evidence of economizing in order to allocate resources to the newly-established universities. 
10.000.000.000 1.000.000.000 100.000.000 10.000.000 
(1) Y=2.783.349.415.(1,056)27 1.000.000 100.000 s 
(Cari Harcamalar) eu) 
(2) Y=747.543.363 (1,0798)27 LnTe(Yatırım Harcamaları) (ve10.000 
(3) Y=263.240.938.(1,0320)27 R(Transfer Harcamaları) 1.000 100 10 
11986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 
Years 
Figure 8. The temporal progress of the (1) Current, (2) Investment (Capital), (3) Transfer Spending in the Higher Education in Turkey from 1986 to 2012. 
Having presented and compared the change in the current, investment, and capital spending in the higher education in Turkey, the temporal change in the total amount of per-student spending in the higher education would give substantial clues upon the higher education policies. 
It is seen that the amount of per-student higher education spending decreased to 3.156 TL in 2012 from 4.165 TL in 1986. Similar to the findings in Carpentier’s (2009:231-245) study, it can be argued that Turkey experienced a continues decline in per-student spending from 1986 to today as England and France did. 
Figure 9. The Temporal Change in Per-Student Spending in Turkey from 1986 to 2012 
It may be said that Figure 9 clearly shows the decline in the amount of per-student spending in Turkey. It is recognized that the per-student spending in Turkey decreased 1.1% on yearly average from 1986 to 2012. It is understood that the reason of the significant increase in the per-student spending in 1988-1990 period was due to the fact that the number of students decreased in this period. 
The Historical Change of University Revenues in Turkey from 1947 to 2012 
The outlook of university revenues in Turkey from 1947 to 2012 is shown in Figure 10. presents the fixed prices of 2005 with the amounts of revenues with current prices. Figure 10. Historical Change of the University Revenues from 1947 to 2012 
An increase in universities’ own revenues especially after 1990’s is illustrated in Figure 10. Having illustrated the revenues of the universities, annual average increase rate of treasury grants and total revenue amounts have been calculated.  It is seen that universities’ own revenues in Turkey increased 9.2% from 1947 to 2012. When this is evaluated like before and after 1980 as such it is done for the comparison of the spending, it is recognized that the own revenues increased 4.2% in the period of 1947-1980 and 16% in 1981-2012 period. This is presented in Figure 10. It is seen that the amount of universities’ own revenues has increased four times in 1981-2012 period compared to 1947-1980 period. This shows that the universities – due to the scarcity of the financial sources – began to look for off-budget sources after 1980 such as circulation capital, projects, and so forth. It is seen that the treasury grants allocated to the universities increased 8.1% on yearly average in Turkey from 1947 to 2012. When the pre and after 1980 period of the treasury grants which is one of the main indicators to determine the resources of the public spending is compared, it is seen that the treasury grants allocated to the universities increased 11.3% on yearly average from 1947 to 1980. When the temporal change of the treasury grants allocated to the universities between 1980 and 2012 is analyzed, it is seen that the grants decreased 5.6% on yearly average. That is to say that the increase rate of public spending for the universities fell by half between the years of 1980-2012 compared to the 1947- 1980 period. 
It is seen that the total revenues of the universities in Turkey increased 8.2% between the years of 1947 and 2012. Figure 11 shows the temporal change of total revenues, treasury grants, and own revenues between the years of 1947 and 2012. 
Figure 11. Temporal change of (1) Total Revenues, (2) Treasury Grants, and (3) Own Revenues of the Universities in Turkey 
It is seen in Figure 11 that the inclination of the increase in own revenues is straighter than those of the total revenue and the treasury grant. 
37 
When the increase rate of research assistants from 1986 onwards is considered, it is seen that the number of research assistants increased 5.4 percent. The percentage shows that the number of hired research assistants is insufficient despite the fact that the number of students increased remarkably. Figure 12 presents the historical change of the numbers of students, instructors, and research assistants with a graph in the universities from 1986 to 2012. 
It is seen that the total number of university students annually increased 6.6% on average from 1986 to 2013. When the total number of instructors in Turkey from 1986 to today is analysed, it will be recognized that the increase rate of instructor number was left behind of the increase rate of student number. While the number of students annually increased 6.6% on average, it was 6.3% for the instructors.  (1)Y=981.842(1,066)2 8 (2)Y=56.566(1,063)28 
(3)Y=21.563(1,054)28 
Figure 12. The Historical Change of the (1) Number of Students, (2) Number of Instructors, (3) Number of Research Assistant in Turkey in the Years 1986-2013 
It can be expressed that - in Turkey as it was in the West - the source allocation, the amounts of spending, the number of instructors which is the main factor of a qualified education have failed to meet the needs that arisen because of the increase in the number of students. Especially the weak increase rate of the number of research assistants hinders the positive projections about the future of education. Âdem (1977: 147) states that the number of instructors in higher education annually increased 8.2% on average in the years 1960-1974. When it is considered that this rate was 6.3% in the years 1986-2013, it is understood that spending for staff was partly cut. The number of students in higher education annually increased 10.5% on average from 1960 to 1974 (Adem, 1977:147). When it is considered that this rate was 6.6% in the years 1986-2015, it is seen that the increase in the number of students lost its momentum. 
Findings Surfaced in the Interviews Done About the Overall Progress of the Finance of Higher Education in Turkey In accordance with one of the main aims of the study – basic changes in the finance of higher education -, important revenue sources of the universities have been determined by the answers (about the spending of the related university) of the previous administers of the universities/faculties. 
Determination Processes of the Budgets of the University and the Faculty 
It is seen that determination of the budgets of the university and the faculty depend on many factors. In accordance with the interviews, it may be suggested that the budgets of the universities and the faculties have not been determined within a pre-established system and many subjective factors play a role at determining the budget. 
It may be argued that the facts and situations stated below can be decisive at determination of the university budget: 
1. General financial situation of the country, the limitations brought by economic 
fluctuations, and inflation rates. 2. The data related with the amount of the allowance in the previous years and 
how this allowance has been spent through the years. 3. The number of total staff, student, and the size of the indoor space or campus, the fixed expenses of water, electricity, and gas directly affect the amount of sources given to the university/faculty. 4. Even though some of the university administers express that the budget is determined with the talks made with the Ministry of Finance, some interviewers claim that the budget of the university may be increased with negotiations/bargaining. These interviewers state that if university representative who will negotiate with the Ministry of Finance can be convincing for the necessity of increasing the budget, and informative about what the budget will be spent for, then the budget may be relatively increased. It is seen that the investment budget – similar to the budget – may be increased by the Ministry of Development if the necessity and importance of the investment project, the qualifications and specifications of it, and its cost are well presented. 5. How the allowance was spent in the previous years, the thoughts and the experience of the chancellors and deans about the rights/wrongs of how the allowances were spent. 6. The disposition of the Ministry of Finance to cut the share given from the capital budget to the university due to the fact that the circulation capital income has increased the revenue of the university. 7. The probability of receiving more public resource through the agency of 
bureaucratic relations and political impacts. 8. It is also expressed that the way of dean’s/faculty representative’s relation with the chancellor may affect the resource allocation. Additionally, it is stated that more resources or more equipment is allocated for certain faculties to receive more votes in chancellor election. 9. It can be said that the socio-economic situation of the location (city or region) of the university – if it is a priority region for development - may affect the amount of allocation. It is seen that the universities receive more allocation if the state intends to turn that place into a centre of attraction. Ünal (1994: 325) suggests that the structure of the societal expectations from the higher education, employment patterns and the reaction of the system to the market and motivators should be analysed in detail. Ünal, (1994: 320) stating that financing problem is directly connected with the employment and qualification in higher education, argues that, higher education has been tried to expand with political promises but insufficient resources and without considering the standards of qualification and demands of the labour market in developing countries and this situation causes problems. One of the main problems of financing the universities in Turkey is the need for a new financial formula. It is a great necessity to create an authentic formula for Turkey by considering the above-mentioned issues and the views of the university administers about it. The aforementioned new model which will be prepared with a perspective to strengthen the public education is expected to be efficient at solving the present problems of the state universities. 
The Primary Sources of Finance of the Universities 
Capital Budget and Circulation Capital 
Most of the university administers consider the capital budget as the source of income of the university. University administers stated that the source of income of the university is the capital budget because it is a state university (A12 Dean, A21 Dean, A22 Dean, A26 Chancellor). Apart from sources allocated from the capital budget, circulation capital is suggested as another source of income of the universities. In another words, “circulation capital” is regarded as the secondary source of income (the first one is capital budget) by the university administers. Nevertheless, some university or faculty administers has expressed that the circulation capital income is scarcely any and has no contribution to the overall revenue of the university (A2 Vice Chancellor, A12 Dean, A22 Dean, A7 Dean). 
The university administers consider individually the public allowance given for current expenditure and the budget decided by the Ministry of Finance as investments for the university. Should the Ministry of Finance approve the investment plan of the university, then the ministry shares a budget for it. 
The right of deciding the budget of the university by the Ministry of Finance has long been a matter of discussion among the university administers. As it is stated in the literature, in the academic meetings Prime Ministry held (1992), the university administers expressed their concerns that the decisions given for the budget of the universities by the Ministry of Finance (then named as State Planning Organization) in the 1990’s were not fair, and unusual priorities have brought about at deciding the university budgets. Today, it is seen that this phenomena/situation still continues. 
It may be suggested that the main point creating a difference at financing the higher education in Turkey is the rates of circulation capital income which changes from faculty to faculty. This situation was presented in Higher Education Strategy by CoHE in 2007. This study presents the distribution of income of the state universities in Turkey in 1995 as follows: 69% budget share, 27% circulation capital income, and 4% student fees. Though it has been fluctuating through the years, the capital income has performed a steady increase by means of its share in the revenues of the universities in Turkey. In 2005, the revenues of the universities were classified as such: 58% budget, 38% circulation capital, and 4% student fees (CoHE, 2007). 
Almost all of the interviewed university administers pay an attention to the circulation capital and put forward the idea that the circulation capital is the main factor creating a difference in the finance of the university. Especially the chancellors intend to establish Medical Faculty which is the best way to receive circulation capital, or if fail in this, they try to sign an "Affiliated Agreement” with a public hospital in the city where the university is so as to receive circulation capital. With this agreement, the members of faculty in the Medical Faculty provide health care in the public hospital in accordance with a protocol signed between the university and the public hospital, thus the university receives a proportionate amount the circulation income of the hospital. 
In the interviews, it may be suggested that three important aspects about the use of circulation income have been observed: 
First of these is, in Turkey, some universities have higher circulation income than the others do. 
Second difference is, the circulation income of same kind of faculties differ from each other’s. That is, it is observed that engineering faculties in two different universities have different amount of circulation income. 
Third difference is that the fields in Social Sciences and Fundamental Sciences are disadvantageous by means of receiving circulation capital income. It can be said that some of these faculties receive circulation income while some other receive hardly any circulation income. It may be suggested that the decisions CoHE taken may affect the possibility of the any Social Sciences Faculties’ receiving circulation income. For instance, in this respect, some Faculties of Education are allowed to open up Pedagogical Formation Certificate, while some others are not. 
It must be noted that this situation directly affects the future of the faculties and the universities because it will create developmental differences between the universities and the faculties that provide the same service. 
Projects 
It is seen that projects’ income are another important source of income for the universities. A4, A6, A8, A11, A18, A21, A22, A23, A24, A25 of the university administers expressed that they benefit well from the project income and it is a good source of income for the universities. University administers divide the project income into two categories as internal and external resources in accordance with their financial resources; and project types are addressed under two main titles. According to this division, projects are classified as substructure designs and individual projects of the members of the faculties. This classification is done to enable the university or the faculty to receive more income from project resources. Resources for substructure designs prepared by the members of faculties and faculties’ need for equipment, machinery, apparatus, and laboratory tools are provided from this source, especially, via the BAP unit of which financial resource is the circulation income of the universities and which supports the Scientific Research Projects in all universities. 
It is understood from the interviews that university’s utilizing from project resources depends on some factors or some factors are influential at universities’ receiving project resources. 
1. The amount of the circulation income that is the basic factor at supporting the scientific researches of the university is profoundly efficient. Among the administers, A8, A10, A12, A13, A15, A22 state that they are directly affected by the fluctuations in the circulation income. 2. The priorities of the institutions and organizations such as TÜBİTAK (scientific and technological research council of Turkey), Ministry of Industry, Ministry of Development and so forth which plays a significant role at distribution of the projects directly affect the level of utilization from the resources. 3. It is observed that science and engineering fields take advantage of the financial resources compared to the social fields. Among the university administers, A6, A12, A20 have stressed that they could not sufficiently utilize from the project resources. 4. It is observed that substructure designs are especially supported by the university/faculty administers because they create more resources and such projects are more easily approved compared to the individual projects which examined through a tight control. Among the university administers, A6, A11, A22, A25 notified that substructure designs receive more support and faculties utilize from these resources much more. 5. The main factors of the university/faculty related with the project are recognized as the appropriateness of substructure, laboratory, and sufficiency of the technical equipment. An administer, who stated that the project resources are not sufficiently benefited from, expressed that the laboratory is inadequate as well, and therefore, works that will bring more income are declined. This shows that the insufficiency of scientific substructure is an important aspect in this issue. 6. The ratio of academician’s free time to their workload is a basic factor at project preparation. As the academicians whose workloads are heavy could not spend enough time for the projects, universities’/faculties’ utilization level from projects is directly affected. A6, A7, A18 have told that the heavy workload profoundly decreases the time that can be spent for the projects. 7. The faculty member’s - who prepares the project - way of relation with the university or faculty administration affect his/her level of utilization from the project resources. It is seen that the projects of the members of faculty who are opponent to the present university administration may be rejected. It is recognized that the university administers’ understanding way of the laws and regulations and also their approach to the execution of the projects may affect the level of utilization from the projects resources. 8. It is observed that the history of the university (whether it is a newly established one or an old one) and the experience of the academicians at project preparation may affect the level of utilization from the project resources. One of the faculty administer (among four who stressed that they are inexperienced about project preparation) states that this is a situation that occurs because they work at a newly established university and expects that university’s this kind of income will increase in the future (A3 Vice Dean). 
Revenues Acquired from the Projects and Their Area of Use 
It is seen that the amount of the revenues of the universities acquired from the projects is directly related with the financial size and the number of the projects. How universities/faculties to be benefited from the project revenues is determined within the limits of the legal regulations. The cut rate of the university in the applied research projects and in the advisory service for the Circulating Capital Operation is determined and executed in accordance with the 04.02.2008 dated and 01697 numbered legal regulations made by the Ministry of Finance General Directorate of Public Accounts. Accordingly, the allocation is as such: 
University’s share in such advisory services is 36%. This 36% is shared as follows; 13.5% is for the university, 4.25% is for the faculty, 4.25% is for the department, 1% is for the Treasury, 5% is for SRP (Scientific Research Projects Unit), 8% is for the faculty member. 
It is possible to say that the financial support of the universities and departments for the projects may change from one university to another. For instance, a newly- founded university in Anatolia may grant up to 100K TL for infrastructure projects of the university, up to 25K TL for individual projects, and up to 30K TL for the projects to improve the quality of education-training activities. However, a university in a metropolitan city may give only up to 5K TL grant for the projects from its circulating capital (which was 10-12K in the past) due to its financial burdens and budget deficit caused because of the spending of medical faculty. Therefore, the financial resource shared for the SRP unit has shown a decline. 
57.7% of the university administers who attended the interview stated that the resources acquired from the projects are spent for machinery and equipment, 34.6% of them stated they are spent for the stationary, 30.8% of them stated that they are spent for the travelling allowances, and 11.5% of them stated that they are spent for maintenance and repair expenses. 
Donations and Aids 
7 out of 26 administrators who were interviewed within the scope of the research expressed that they may receive donation and aid. They stated that the matter of receiving donation and aid is troublesome and it is subject to strict rules. Those administrators who received donation and aid stated that donation and aid may be granted in the ways such as:  1. The donations and aids that are granted to the university by the rich and the 
benefactor who live in the city where the university is situated. 2. The donations and aids such as computer, library staff and so forth that are 
granted to the university by the Alumni Association. 3. The donations and aids that are received by the sponsors in the activities such 
as career days and graduation ceremony. 4. The donations and aids (such as painting the faculty buildings, buying tools and materials for the sport activities) that are granted by the private entrepreneurs who run the cafeteria etc. places in the university. 5. The donations and aids received by the ads on the journals, the student 
yearbooks, and so forth. 6. The donations received by the foreign governments, state institutions (Local Governing Institutions, Governorates) or private institutions (Chamber of Commerce, SME’s, Industrialists), Non-governmental Organization and the donations they grant such as old but working machines. 7. The donations and aids in kind granted by the company executives whom the member of faculties are acquainted with by way of the TÜBİTAK (Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey) projects. Some faculty members, for instance, stated that they received expensive machines such as tablet maker, stability cabin and so forth. However, it was expressed that those granted machines were old but working and they were recognized in accordance with the applicable law and regulations. 
It is seen that Faculty of Sciences, Faculty of Engineering, and Faculty of Pharmacy which seek for such donations and aids are more often benefited from them. Furthermore, it can be argued that Social Sciences Faculties which are relatively deep-rooted and receive donations and aids from their alumni’s and alumni association are more likely benefited from these resources. It may be suggested that there is another significant difference between the state and foundation universities within this context. It was stressed by the university administers that the foundation universities receive a good amount of donations and aids from their foundations and founding businessmen, yet the state universities have legal and bureaucratic obstacles in the matter of establishing a foundation and the university administers may encounter with problems in case of a complaint because of establishing a foundation. 
It is thought that the benefactors and businessmen who grant donations and aids to the universities in the cities where they live consider not only contributing those universities but also realizing their future aims via these universities. That is, these donations and aids may turn into certain expectations and demands from the rector. 
It is doubtless that the amount of the above mentioned donations and aids and their impacts on the research processes may create a significant advantage for the university. It is possible to say that donations and aids can positively affect the academic staff and motivate them, and increase the number of scientific publications. However, cities (universities) do not equally receive the donations and aids. Ankara, for instance, is a place where there are relatively more industrial enterprises compared to many other cities. Yet, university administers stressed that they do not receive sufficient donations and aids when the number and financial power of the enterprises are taken into consideration. An administer from a university in Ankara stated that they could not analyze a sample due to the insufficiency of their laboratory and they declined the works that may even financially contribute the university. Here, it may be argued how and why two state universities having different conditions are subject to the same criteria in the eyes of no. 5018 Public Finance Management Law. When it is taken into consideration that a system based upon performance has been thought to put in action recently, it will be an injustice to identify these differences among universities with the scientists. 
The Policies of Resource Allocation and Resource Use and the Effects of These Policies 
By means of conceptual framework, one of the most basic indicators of the financing problem in higher education is the insufficiency of the public resources. If the state does not share sufficient resources to solve the problem, universities try to solve their financial problems by creating their own resources. 80.8% of the university administers interviewed in the scope of research expressed their concerns that the public resources does not totally meet the expenses of the university. It is stated that the biggest problems in universities are proportionately as follows: first, not having sufficient space (area), second, the inadequate number of academic staff. The interviews with administers made it clear that the inadequacy of physical space especially for the universities situated within the cities has reached its highest level. 
42% of the university administers express that they need more academic member. It has been stressed that there is a lack in the number of research assistants especially in the applied sciences such as engineering and college of science. It has been stated that the labs are mostly used by the research assistants and the place of the retired academic members’ could not adequately replaced. 
One of the issues making the academician angry is that the student quota is decided by CoHE without the approval of the academic members, yet CoHE does not allow the universities to hire adequate number of the academic staff to meet the needs arising from the rising number of students. 
53% of the university administers within the scope of the research have stated that the classrooms are not large enough. Besides, 38% of the academic members have complained that their rooms are not large enough or sometimes two-three academic members share the same room. University administers have also signified that there are problems in the universities emerging from the financial resources problem in higher education. Some of the effects of the problems in higher education caused by the new liberal politics in the country that are stated in literature are listed as follows; overcrowded classes, labs that are used unequally by the students, one out of six-seven students having an opportunity to do an experiment and the rest’s doing nothing but just watching the experiment, doing experiments only at some kinds and skipping other important kind of experiments due to financial resource insufficiency.The Differences of Resource Allocation between Social and Applied Sciences 
It can be said that the aforementioned differences of financing among the faculties are similar to the process of deciding the budget of the faculties and universities, and similar factors make a difference in this issue. The university administers’ answers in the interview show that the differences caused by the expenses such as the pressure of Medical Faculty’s expenses upon the university budget, the number of the university staff and university’s physical areas, the choices of the Chancery, applied science department’s spending such as labs, machinery, equipment, and so forth can be decisive. It has been expressed by the administers that this situation is seen not only between Social Sciences and Physical Sciences Faculties, but also between Physical Sciences and Engineering Faculties which are both applied sciences. 
Student Services 
Students come first by means of who are affected by the negative effects of the inadequacy of the public resources in higher education. In literature, it is particularly stressed that social costs are paid because of the resource cut (Jhonstone, 2008, Newfield, 2008). Newfield (2008:151) conceptualized as “Market Victims” those who suffer a loss due to social costs. By means of student services, most of the faculty administers have stressed that the deanery is not responsible from financing the student services, but the chancery organizes these services. The inadequacy of the refectory and the dormitory is initially mentioned. It is also stated that students are provided eating with reasonable prices in all universities. Yet, it is also expressed that some students do not benefit from the refectory due to the long queues in the refectory. Additionally, some faculty administers indicate that the quality of the food served in the refectory is questionable, though its price is reasonable. 
The university administers’ answers to the question concerning how they meet the financing deficit that caused because of government’s revoking student fees can be collected under such titles: 
1. Universities could not solve this problem yet. It is seen that universities/faculties struggling because of the inadequacy of the budget. The idea that this financial gap could be filled with selling real estates of the university shows the seriousness of the situation. University administers state that this financial gap will be a huge problem for the university. 2. It has been told that the universities which have a huge amount of circulation capital can fill this gap. Additionally, sufficient amount of money has been transferred from other budget items to fill this gap, or the university has begun to economize at some certain issues. 3. Some student’s facilities have been reduced because of the reduction of fees. For instance, scientific tours have been limited, the quality of meals served at refectory has been reduced, and the condition of the student dormitories has begun to go bad. 4. It has been expressed that the quality of the educational facilities has begun to 
drop. Library 
According to the interviews done with the university and faculty administers, it is seen that 80.8% of them have the idea that the data bases of the university are satisfying. 12 administers stated that the demand for the digital sources has been on the rise lately. Though the availability of the date bases is reached to a high level, only 57.7% of the university administers suggested that the libraries are sufficient. 
Financial Autonomy and Universities 
65.4% of the university administers who attended this research have stated that there is no financial autonomy in Turkey. The universities administers have stressed that the lack of financial autonomy is a key issue for universities. 
The university administers have expressed that university’s feeling of trust to it’s administers plays a key role at university spending. They state that if someone is elected as the administer of a faculty, this person should be trusted. Chart 48 has collected the administers’ ideas and thoughts related to this issue under 8 categories. 65.4% of the university administers who attended this research have stated that there is no financial autonomy of the universities. Nearly half of the university administers have expressed that there should be an easiness concerning using the resources. 19.2% of the university administers state that universities should create their own revenues and spend them for the needs of the university. 
University administers have stressed that administrative autonomy is as much important as financial autonomy. They clearly state that the academic staff to be hired and the number of students to be enrolled to the university should be decided by university’s itself. 
It can be expressed that the financial autonomy is understood by university administers as university’s creating its own revenues and have a right to spend it. 
Transformation of the Financing of the Higher Education 
The university administers who participated in this research stressed those points as the basic reasons of the transformation of the higher education: 1. The efforts to meet the financial deficit (caused by the inadequacy of the public 
resources) by creating revenues, 2. The effects of the foundation universities to the higher education system, 3. The gradually increasing popularization of the idea of doing scientific research 
based upon project, 4. The concern to follow the changes in the science and technology, 5. Global changes in the higher education, 6. The rising trend to orient to the income-generating activities with political and 
institutional motivations and pressures, 7. The spread of the idea that supports the privatization and that the private sector 
always gives better services and never loses money. 69.2% of the university administers agree with the idea that the work load has increased. This situation, as Olssen and Peters stressed (2005:325), explains that specialization has increased and thus the work load of the academic staff has increased due to the fact that new liberalism has effects of the universities as a result of the attempts to restructure the market and the state. Chart 49 shows the ideas of the administers about the transformation in the higher education and the work load. 
20 out of 26 university and faculty administers (79.9%) who participated in the research have approved the current transformation in the higher education in Turkey. University and faculty administers stated that they were supported by the higher councils in the higher education and by the rectors through scientific meetings, and by the politicians. 14 of the university and faculty administers expressed such an opinion and this is equal to 53.8% of them. 
Academic and Societal Outcomes of the Transformation of Higher Education 
University administers have been asked what they think about the academic and societal outcomes of the financial transformation of higher education. It has been found that while some administers state that this transformation have positive effects, some others have stressed that this transformation has negative effects upon public education. 
The negative effects of this process can be collected under such titles: 
1. There is an on-going negative process running against the Social Sciences and 
Fundamental Sciences concerning revenue generation. 2. The incapacity of public university at competing with the private universities 
cause a societal despair and unhappiness. 3. It is thought that making a new classification for the universities having a 
strong financial outlook may impair the universities. 4. The situation that foundation universities are not established in the place where trade is not promoted and where the population is not densely populated may have negative effects. 5. Private sector is palliative, profit-oriented, tends to save the day, and makes 
concessions from scientific norms to reduce the costs. 6. Academicians tend to deal with projects because of the project revenues rather 
than giving lectures. 7. Scientific activities conducted based on projects being unproductive 
concerning the scientific development. 8. There is a commercialisation of scientific activities and thus loss of scientific 
information. 9. Cooperation with industry may not solve all the financial resource problems of 
the universities. Therefore, universities should not lean only on industry. 10. As a result of universities getting into market, universities are considered as a financial competitor by the private companies. This causes universities’ commercial activities being limited by legal barriers. 11. Should the higher education transformation goes in this way, many 
universities in the country may not exist any longer. Results 
It can be said that the amount of resources shared for the higher education has been reduced in many countries after 1980s. It can be said that these resources have been limitedly increased in some countries by governments in accordance with price indexes after 1980s. It is seen that Turkey experienced a similar situation. Even though there was an increase in higher education spending in Turkey, it is seen that the increase in higher education spending after 1980s is comparatively lower than the one before 1980. While the annual increase rate of higher education spending was 12.3% from 1938 to 1980, it decreased to 6.2% in the years from 1980 to 2012. Although many universities have been established and there is at least one university in almost each city in Turkey, the facilities provided (which is lower than the past) for the universities is a matter of discussion. Another reality has come to surface with the classification of the public expenditure in Turkey after 1980 as current, capital, and transfer expenditures. 
When the historical change of the revenues of the universities is analysed, it is seen that the need for a cooperation with the market and the aim of earning income which are enforced by the new liberal politics accelerated in Turkey after 1980s. While the own resources of the universities was 4.2% in the 1947-1980 period, this rate increased to 16% in 1981-2012 period. This situation is consistent with the opinions of the university administers. University administers have stated that they have been encouraged and urged to do projects and they have recently carried out some projects which are seen as a primary resource to meet the financial needs of the universities. 
The position of the foundation universities in the system is one of the most serious outcomes of the new liberal politics run in Turkey. While the government does not share sufficient resources for the state universities, it, on the other hand, provides both financial resources and legal easiness for the foundation universities; and this may make the foundation universities decisive about the future of the higher education. Due to the fact that the quality of the higher education facilities run by state universities have been decreased, people may prefer the foundation universities for qualified education more than ever in the future. The present system leads the highly qualified students to go to foundation universities because of the grants given by them, and this situation is stressed by the university administers as well. This situation will decrease the feeling of trust to the public universities and limit the demand for them in the future, and this will prepare a legitimate basis for the paid education. This means that the thousands of successful but poor students will be out of the system and the democratic values and criteria in the higher education system will disappear. On one hand, the less successful but rich students’ receiving education at foundation universities and successful students’ going to the foundation universities because of the grants given to them, on the other hand, state universities’ not receiving sufficient amount of money to develop themselves reveal the double standard in higher education. Kurt, A. I. (2016). Türkiye’de Yükseköğretimin Finansmanındaki Dönüşümün Zamansal ve Politik Analizi. International Journal of Educational Policies, 10(1), pp. 21-82. 
ISSN: 1307-3842 
